get-support.mdx, before:

---
title: "Get support"
---

## Chats, forums, and Telegram bots

- [https://t.me/tondev\_eng](https://t.me/tondev_eng) - the official TON Developers chat.
- [https://t.me/tondev](https://t.me/tondev) - the Russian-speaking TON Developers chat.
- [https://t.me/ton\_help\_bot](https://t.me/ton_help_bot) - support for TON Core products for users (bridge, vesting, multisig, etc). Zendesk + Telegram Bot.
- [https://t.me/toncenter\_help\_bot](https://t.me/toncenter_help_bot) - public Ton Center API support, Zendesk + Telegram Bot.
- [https://t.me/validators\_help\_bot](https://t.me/validators_help_bot) - public support for validators, Zendesk + Telegram Bot.
- [https://t.me/ton\_node\_help](https://t.me/ton_node_help) - public chat group for blockchain node administrators.

## Builders portal

- [https://builders.ton.org](https://builders.ton.org) - main entry point for projects.

## TON Hubs

- [https://builders.ton.org/opportunities/hubs](https://builders.ton.org/opportunities/hubs) - regional communities of builders.

## Security audit firms, agencies, and freelancers

- [https://ton.org/en/talents](https://ton.org/en/talents) - open database aims to connect teams willing to build products on TON with skilled professionals and agencies.
- [https://ton.org/en/talents?Auditors](https://ton.org/en/talents?Auditors) - security auditors for smart contracts and TON-based applications.

## Bug bounty programs

- [https://github.com/ton-blockchain/bug-bounty](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/bug-bounty) - TON Blockchain bug bounty program.
- [https://t.me/ton\_bugs\_bot](https://t.me/ton_bugs_bot) - security bug bounty, Telegram Bot.
- [https://hackenproof.com/programs/ton-society](https://hackenproof.com/programs/ton-society) - Websites, web apps, and mini apps operated by TON Society.

Commit message:

feat: enhance links and descriptions on the `/get-support` page

get-support.mdx, after:

---
title: "Get support"
---

## Telegram chats, channels, and bots

- [Official TON Developers folder](https://t.me/addlist/dyiIa5Skb3JiN2Fk) - main collection of channels to subscribe to:
  - Mainnet and testnet status updates.
  - Developer news.
  - Contests and grants.
  - Job opportunities.
  - Ecosystem news.

Validators and nodes:

- [TON Validators Support bot](https://t.me/validators_help_bot) - tech support for validators.
- [TON Node Help chat](https://t.me/ton_node_help) - tech support chat group for non-validator nodes, like archive nodes or liteservers.

APIs:

- [TON Center API Tech Support bot](https://t.me/toncenter_help_bot) - tech support for [TON Center APIs](https://toncenter.com).
  - To get API keys, use the general [TON Center bot](https://t.me/toncenter)

Miscellaneous:

- [TON Help bot](https://t.me/ton_help_bot) - tech support for TON Core products (bridge, vesting, multisig, etc).

## Builders portal

- [TON Builders Portal](https://builders.ton.org) - main entry point for new projects: access support programs, resources, and partner offers.

## TON Hubs

- [Connect with TON Hubs](https://builders.ton.org/opportunities/hubs) - become part of regional communities of builders.

## Security audit firms, agencies, and freelancers

- [TON Talent Directory](https://ton.org/en/talents) - connect with teams willing to build products on TON, skilled professionals, and agencies.
- [Auditors in TON Talent Directory](https://ton.org/en/talents?Auditors) - find security auditors for smart contracts and TON-based applications.

## Bug bounty programs

- [TON Security Bug Bounty on GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/bug-bounty) - description and links to all relevant projects and resources to research vulnerabilities in.
- [TON Security Bug Bounty bot in Telegram](https://t.me/ton_bugs_bot) - send general blockchain security reports to this Telegram bot.
- [HackenProof](https://hackenproof.com/programs/ton) - websites, web apps, and Telegram mini-apps operated by TON Foundation.
