ecosystem/ton-connect/index.mdx, before:

---
title: "TON Connect overview"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

To integrate with TON, the standard wallet connection protocol is used — TON Connect. It is similar to WalletConnect on Ethereum, but made specifically for TON and covers basic integration aspects. For deeper integrations, it's common to utilize various supplementary SDKs and APIs.

<img
  className="block dark:hidden"
  src="/resources/images/ton-connect/basic-schema.svg"
  alt="Basic communication schema of TON Connect"
/>

<img
  className="hidden dark:block"
  src="/resources/images/ton-connect/basic-schema-dark.svg"
  alt="Basic communication schema of TON Connect"
/>

## About TON Connect

<video autoPlay muted loop className="w-full rounded-xl" src="/resources/videos/TonConnect.mp4">
  Your browser does not support the \<video> tag.
</video>

TON Connect enables secure communication between wallets and decentralized applications, allowing users to authorize transactions while maintaining control of their private keys.

Currently, TON Connect supports over 30 wallets and connects to hundreds of major applications across the TON ecosystem. As the mandatory connection protocol for all Telegram Mini Apps, it serves as the gateway to TON's entire ecosystem of applications and services.

Think of it as the essential infrastructure that your institutional clients will need to access any TON-based services — from DeFi protocols to gaming applications to payment systems.

For technical architecture details: [TON Connect protocol specification on GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton-connect).

## Are you building a web3 app?

Explore the demo apps made with React.

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="Demo TON dApp with React"
    icon="link"
    href="https://ton-connect.github.io/demo-dapp-with-react-ui/"
    arrow="true"
  />
  <Card
    title="Demo TON dApp GitHub repository"
    icon="github"
    arrow="true"
    href="https://github.com/ton-connect/demo-dapp-with-react-ui"
  />
</Columns>

<Card
  title="Basic React project example, GitHub repository"
  icon="github"
  arrow="true"
  href="https://github.com/memearchivarius/react-ui-example"
/>

Go through the step-by-step guide with a tech that suits you most.

<Card
  icon="flask"
  title="How to make a decentralized application (dApp) on TON"
  href="/guidebook/dapp">
</Card>

Or skim the related reference pages.

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="App manifest"
    icon="book"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest#app-manifest">
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="AppKit reference"
    icon="book"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/appkit">
  </Card>
</Columns>

## Are you building a web3 wallet?

Follow the step-by-step guide.

<Card
  icon="flask"
  title="How to make a wallet on TON"
  href="/guidebook/wallet">
</Card>

Or skim the related reference pages.

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="Wallet manifest"
    icon="book"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest#wallet-manifest">
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="WalletKit reference"
    icon="book"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit">
  </Card>
</Columns>

For more, see the TON Connect articles from Google Docs.

<Columns cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="QA Guide"
    icon="book"
    href="/integrate/ported/qa-guide">
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Native or web wallets"
    icon="book"
    href="/integrate/ported/native-web">
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="In-app or browser extension wallets"
    icon="book"
    href="/integrate/ported/browser-extension">
  </Card>
</Columns>

## Complete integration recipes

Comprehensive guides that walk you through complete integration scenarios, covering everything from initial setup to production deployment. Each recipe includes code examples, best practices, and troubleshooting tips.

<Columns cols={1}>
  <Card
    icon="flask"
    title="How to integrate TON into a Centralized Exchange (CEX)"
    href="/guidebook/cex"
  />
</Columns>

## Curated guides and tutorials from the community

Tutorials and guides created by the TON community to help developers integrate TON into their applications. They provide practical, real-world examples and alternative approaches to common integration challenges.

<Columns cols={1}>
  <Card
    icon="scroll"
    title="Index of curated community tutorials"
    href="/guidebook/more"
  />
</Columns>

## Join the community

If you have questions about integrating TON into your project, need help troubleshooting issues, or want to discuss best practices with other developers, join our community channels.

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    icon="telegram"
    title="Telegram folder with many developer chats"
    arrow="true"
    href="https://t.me/addlist/1r5Vcb8eljk5Yzcy"
  />
  <Card
    icon="person"
    title="List of skilled professionals and agencies"
    arrow="true"
    href="https://ton.org/en/talents"
  />
</Columns>

## See also

- https://docs.ton.org/v3/guidelines/ton-connect/overview
- https://docs.ton.org/v3/guidelines/ton-connect/creating-manifest
- https://docs.ton.org/guidelines/install-ton-connect
- https://docs.ton.org/v3/guidelines/ton-connect/guidelines/developers#ton-connect-ui
- https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton-connect
- https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallets-list

Commit message:

feat: initial appkit overview page and some guidebook/dapp enhancements

ecosystem/ton-connect/index.mdx, after:

---
title: "TON Connect overview"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

To integrate with TON, the standard wallet connection protocol is used — TON Connect. It is similar to WalletConnect on Ethereum, but made specifically for TON and covers basic integration aspects. For deeper integrations, it's common to utilize various supplementary SDKs and APIs.

<img
  className="block dark:hidden"
  src="/resources/images/ton-connect/basic-schema.svg"
  alt="Basic communication schema of TON Connect"
/>

<img
  className="hidden dark:block"
  src="/resources/images/ton-connect/basic-schema-dark.svg"
  alt="Basic communication schema of TON Connect"
/>

## About TON Connect

<video autoPlay muted loop className="w-full rounded-xl" src="/resources/videos/TonConnect.mp4">
  Your browser does not support the \<video> tag.
</video>

TON Connect enables secure communication between wallets and decentralized applications, allowing users to authorize transactions while maintaining control of their private keys.

Currently, TON Connect supports over 30 wallets and connects to hundreds of major applications across the TON ecosystem. As the mandatory connection protocol for all Telegram Mini Apps, it serves as the gateway to TON's entire ecosystem of applications and services.

Think of it as the essential infrastructure that your institutional clients will need to access any TON-based services — from DeFi protocols to gaming applications to payment systems.

For technical architecture details: [TON Connect protocol specification on GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton-connect).

## Are you building a web3 app?

Explore the demo apps made with React.

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="Demo TON dApp with React"
    icon="link"
    href="https://ton-connect.github.io/demo-dapp-with-react-ui/"
    arrow="true"
  />
  <Card
    title="Demo TON dApp GitHub repository"
    icon="github"
    arrow="true"
    href="https://github.com/ton-connect/demo-dapp-with-react-ui"
  />
</Columns>

Proceed with integration and usage recipes.

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    icon="flask"
    title="How to integrate a dApp with TON"
    href="/guidebook/dapp"
  />
  <Card
    icon="wrench"
    title="Common usage examples"
    href="/guidebook/dapp#usage"
  />
</Columns>

Skim the related reference pages.

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="App manifest"
    icon="book"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest#app-manifest">
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="AppKit overview"
    icon="book"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/appkit">
  </Card>
</Columns>

## Are you building a web3 wallet?

Follow the step-by-step guide.

<Card
  icon="flask"
  title="How to make a wallet on TON"
  href="/guidebook/wallet">
</Card>

Or skim the related reference pages.

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="Wallet manifest"
    icon="book"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest#wallet-manifest">
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="WalletKit reference"
    icon="book"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit">
  </Card>
</Columns>

For more, see the TON Connect articles from Google Docs.

<Columns cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="QA Guide"
    icon="book"
    href="/integrate/ported/qa-guide">
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Native or web wallets"
    icon="book"
    href="/integrate/ported/native-web">
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="In-app or browser extension wallets"
    icon="book"
    href="/integrate/ported/browser-extension">
  </Card>
</Columns>

## Complete integration recipes

Comprehensive guides that walk you through complete integration scenarios, covering everything from initial setup to production deployment. Each recipe includes code examples, best practices, and troubleshooting tips.

<Columns cols={1}>
  <Card
    icon="flask"
    title="How to integrate TON into a Centralized Exchange (CEX)"
    href="/guidebook/cex"
  />
</Columns>

## Curated guides and tutorials from the community

Tutorials and guides created by the TON community to help developers integrate TON into their applications. They provide practical, real-world examples and alternative approaches to common integration challenges.

<Columns cols={1}>
  <Card
    icon="scroll"
    title="Index of curated community tutorials"
    href="/guidebook/more"
  />
</Columns>

## Join the community

If you have questions about integrating TON into your project, need help troubleshooting issues, or want to discuss best practices with other developers, join our community channels.

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    icon="telegram"
    title="Telegram folder with many developer chats"
    arrow="true"
    href="https://t.me/addlist/1r5Vcb8eljk5Yzcy"
  />
  <Card
    icon="person"
    title="List of skilled professionals and agencies"
    arrow="true"
    href="https://ton.org/en/talents"
  />
</Columns>

## See also

- [Technical specification of the TON Connect protocol (GitHub)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton-connect)
- [Official list of wallets that support TON Connect (GitHub)](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/wallets-list)
- [HTTP bridge for TON Connect](https://github.com/ton-connect/bridge)
