ecosystem/node/mytonctrl/installer.mdx, before:

## MyTonInstaller commands

MyTonInstaller complements MyTonCtrl by bootstrapping and maintaining TON node components. The commands below are always available from the installer console and can also be triggered in batch mode (`mytoninstaller -c "<command> ..."`). Each section documents the command’s purpose, syntax, behavior, and the supported options.

## status
**Purpose:** Inspect whether required TON services and credentials are in place, and review the current node arguments.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
status
```

**Behavior**
- Checks for the presence of validator, mytoncore, console, and liteserver artifacts under `/var/ton-work` and reports each as enabled/disabled.
- Loads the active node argument list (from `set_node_argument`) and prints every flag with its stored values.
- Does not modify any files, making it safe to rerun as a health check.


## set_node_argument
**Purpose:** Add, update, or remove TON validator/validator-engine command-line arguments.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
set_node_argument <arg-name> [arg-value] [-d]
```

**Behavior**
- Requires at least the argument name (for example `--archive-ttl`, `-M`, `--add-shard`).
- When additional values are provided they are concatenated and passed to the helper script `set_node_argument.py`, which edits `/etc/ton/validator-engine.conf`-style settings.
- Use `-d` as the final flag to delete the argument instead of setting a value.
- Runs with root privileges to ensure the validator configuration is writable.

**Examples**
```mytonctrl
set_node_argument --archive-ttl 86400
set_node_argument --add-shard 0:2000000000000000 0:a000000000000000
set_node_argument --archive-ttl -d
```

## enable
**Purpose:** Provision or activate bundled components such as the validator console, liteserver, or auxiliary services.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
enable <code>
```

**Behavior**
- Accepts one of the codes listed below and invokes the corresponding setup routine through `mytoninstaller -e enable<code>`.
- If you enable the TON HTTP API (`THA`), the installer first generates a local liteserver config by running `clcf` automatically.
- All routines run with elevated privileges because they create system users, service units, configuration files, or keys.

**Supported codes**

| Code | Component | Purpose | Key tasks |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `FN` | First node bootstrap | Prepare a fresh validator environment so MyTonCtrl can manage a node end to end. | Creates the validator system user, installs the validator engine as a systemd service, generates the initial `config.json`, downloads blockchain dumps, and performs the first validator start. |
| `VC` | Validator console | Provide secure CLI access to the validator engine for MyTonCtrl and operators. | Generates server/client key pairs, wires them into `validator.config.json`, updates MyTonCore with console credentials, and restarts validator + MyTonCore to apply. |
| `LS` | liteserver | Enable the local liteserver endpoint used by tooling and APIs. | Creates liteserver keys, registers them in `validator.config.json`, updates MyTonCore’s lite-client section, and restarts services to expose the port locally. |
| `DS` | DHT server | Run a standalone DHT node so the validator can advertise itself through the ADNL network. | Installs and enables the TON DHT service, provisions keys, selects public ports, generates/prints the ADNL address list, and starts the daemon under systemd. |
| `JR` | JSON-RPC frontend | Install [MyTonCtrl’s JSON-RPC bridge](https://github.com/igroman787/mtc-jsonrpc) for programmatic control. | Executes `jsonrpcinstaller.sh` with root privileges to deploy the service, wiring it for the current node user. |
| `THA` | TON HTTP API | Expose the [TON HTTP API](https://github.com/toncenter/ton-http-api) backed by the local liteserver for REST-like access. | Generates a fresh liteserver config when needed and runs `ton_http_api_installer.sh` to install and configure the HTTP API service. |
| `LSP` | ls-proxy | Proxy the liteserver connection for safer remote access and load balancing. | Installs the ls-proxy binary, creates a systemd unit, bootstraps the config with local liteserver credentials, and starts the proxy service. |
| `TS` | TON Storage | Provide local TON Storage capabilities for block archives and state downloads. | Deploys `tonutils-storage`, configures public UDP/API ports and external IP, persists the config, registers connectivity details in MyTonCore, and starts the storage daemon. |

**Example**
```mytonctrl
enable FN
```

## update
**Purpose:** Re-run enablement routines for installed components to pull updates or repair their configuration.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
update <code>
```

**Behavior**
- Shares the same code list and internal handler as `enable`, but intended for repeat executions when you need to refresh binaries or regenerate configs (for example after package updates).
- `update JR` is the common shorthand for reinstalling or updating the JSON-RPC service.
- Requires the same elevated privileges as `enable` because it delegates to the same installer events.

**Example**
```mytonctrl
update JR
```

## plsc
**Purpose:** Print the current liteserver configuration JSON.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
plsc
```

**Behavior**
- Reads the configuration produced by `GetLiteServerConfig` (typically `/usr/bin/ton/local.config.json`) and prints it as pretty JSON.
- Useful for verifying that liteserver keys, ports, and peers match expectations after running `enable LS` or `clcf`.


## clcf
**Purpose:** Create or refresh the liteserver local configuration file.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
clcf [-u <user>]
```

**Behavior**
- Fetches the latest init block via TON API; if unavailable, falls back to the bundled `global.config.json`.
- Base64-encodes the init block and invokes `mytoninstaller -e clc -i <base64>` under the specified user (defaults to the installer’s current user).
- Writes `/usr/bin/ton/local.config.json` and related liteserver files so that services like TON HTTP API can start.

**Examples**
```mytonctrl
clcf
clcf -u validator
```

## print_ls_proxy_config
**Purpose:** Display the active ls-proxy configuration file.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
print_ls_proxy_config
```

**Behavior**
- Reads `/var/ls_proxy/ls-proxy-config.json` (via `get_ls_proxy_config`) and prints it in formatted JSON.
- Allows quick inspection of proxy targets after running `enable LSP`.


## create_ls_proxy_config_file
**Purpose:** Placeholder for generating an ls-proxy config file.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
create_ls_proxy_config_file
```

**Behavior**
- Outputs `TODO` because the implementation is not yet implemented.
- Use `print_ls_proxy_config` or edit `/var/ls_proxy/ls-proxy-config.json` manually until this command is implemented.


## drvcf
**Purpose:** Rebuild `config.json` for the validator engine using existing key material (dangerous recovery).

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
drvcf
```

**Behavior**
- Calls `DangerousRecoveryValidatorConfigFile`, which scans `/var/ton-work/db/keyring`, recent election dumps, and mytoncore settings to reconstruct validator, liteserver, control, DHT, and ADNL entries.
- Prints the reconstructed configuration and any unused keys so you can review the output before applying it manually.
- Intended for disaster recovery scenarios; it does not overwrite files automatically.


## setwebpass
**Purpose:** Set or change the password for the MyTonCtrl web administration (JSON-RPC) interface.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
setwebpass
```

**Behavior**
- Runs `/usr/src/mtc-jsonrpc/mtc-jsonrpc.py -p`, prompting for the new password and updating the credential store.
- No arguments are accepted; rerun whenever you need to rotate web admin credentials.

Commit message:

fix(ecosystem-node): set up titles for mytonctrl

ecosystem/node/mytonctrl/installer.mdx, after:

---
title: "Installer"
description: "MyTonInstaller complements MyTonCtrl by bootstrapping and maintaining TON node components."
---

Run this commands from the installer context of mytonctrl:
```mytonctrl
MyTonCtrl> installer
Installer>
```

## status
**Purpose:** Inspect whether required TON services and credentials are in place, and review the current node arguments.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
status
```

**Behavior**
- Checks for the presence of validator, mytoncore, console, and liteserver artifacts under `/var/ton-work` and reports each as enabled/disabled.
- Loads the active node argument list (from `set_node_argument`) and prints every flag with its stored values.
- Does not modify any files, making it safe to rerun as a health check.


## set_node_argument
**Purpose:** Add, update, or remove TON validator/validator-engine command-line arguments.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
set_node_argument <arg-name> [arg-value] [-d]
```

**Behavior**
- Requires at least the argument name (for example `--archive-ttl`, `-M`, `--add-shard`).
- When additional values are provided they are concatenated and passed to the helper script `set_node_argument.py`, which edits `/etc/ton/validator-engine.conf`-style settings.
- Use `-d` as the final flag to delete the argument instead of setting a value.
- Runs with root privileges to ensure the validator configuration is writable.

**Examples**
```mytonctrl
set_node_argument --archive-ttl 86400
set_node_argument --add-shard 0:2000000000000000 0:a000000000000000
set_node_argument --archive-ttl -d
```

## enable
**Purpose:** Provision or activate bundled components such as the validator console, liteserver, or auxiliary services.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
enable <code>
```

**Behavior**
- Accepts one of the codes listed below and invokes the corresponding setup routine through `mytoninstaller -e enable<code>`.
- If you enable the TON HTTP API (`THA`), the installer first generates a local liteserver config by running `clcf` automatically.
- All routines run with elevated privileges because they create system users, service units, configuration files, or keys.

**Supported codes**

| Code | Component | Purpose | Key tasks |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `FN` | First node bootstrap | Prepare a fresh validator environment so MyTonCtrl can manage a node end to end. | Creates the validator system user, installs the validator engine as a systemd service, generates the initial `config.json`, downloads blockchain dumps, and performs the first validator start. |
| `VC` | Validator console | Provide secure CLI access to the validator engine for MyTonCtrl and operators. | Generates server/client key pairs, wires them into `validator.config.json`, updates MyTonCore with console credentials, and restarts validator + MyTonCore to apply. |
| `LS` | liteserver | Enable the local liteserver endpoint used by tooling and APIs. | Creates liteserver keys, registers them in `validator.config.json`, updates MyTonCore’s lite-client section, and restarts services to expose the port locally. |
| `DS` | DHT server | Run a standalone DHT node so the validator can advertise itself through the ADNL network. | Installs and enables the TON DHT service, provisions keys, selects public ports, generates/prints the ADNL address list, and starts the daemon under systemd. |
| `JR` | JSON-RPC frontend | Install [MyTonCtrl’s JSON-RPC bridge](https://github.com/igroman787/mtc-jsonrpc) for programmatic control. | Executes `jsonrpcinstaller.sh` with root privileges to deploy the service, wiring it for the current node user. |
| `THA` | TON HTTP API | Expose the [TON HTTP API](https://github.com/toncenter/ton-http-api) backed by the local liteserver for REST-like access. | Generates a fresh liteserver config when needed and runs `ton_http_api_installer.sh` to install and configure the HTTP API service. |
| `LSP` | ls-proxy | Proxy the liteserver connection for safer remote access and load balancing. | Installs the ls-proxy binary, creates a systemd unit, bootstraps the config with local liteserver credentials, and starts the proxy service. |
| `TS` | TON Storage | Provide local TON Storage capabilities for block archives and state downloads. | Deploys `tonutils-storage`, configures public UDP/API ports and external IP, persists the config, registers connectivity details in MyTonCore, and starts the storage daemon. |

**Example**
```mytonctrl
enable FN
```

## update
**Purpose:** Re-run enablement routines for installed components to pull updates or repair their configuration.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
update <code>
```

**Behavior**
- Shares the same code list and internal handler as `enable`, but intended for repeat executions when you need to refresh binaries or regenerate configs (for example after package updates).
- `update JR` is the common shorthand for reinstalling or updating the JSON-RPC service.
- Requires the same elevated privileges as `enable` because it delegates to the same installer events.

**Example**
```mytonctrl
update JR
```

## plsc
**Purpose:** Print the current liteserver configuration JSON.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
plsc
```

**Behavior**
- Reads the configuration produced by `GetLiteServerConfig` (typically `/usr/bin/ton/local.config.json`) and prints it as pretty JSON.
- Useful for verifying that liteserver keys, ports, and peers match expectations after running `enable LS` or `clcf`.


## clcf
**Purpose:** Create or refresh the liteserver local configuration file.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
clcf [-u <user>]
```

**Behavior**
- Fetches the latest init block via TON API; if unavailable, falls back to the bundled `global.config.json`.
- Base64-encodes the init block and invokes `mytoninstaller -e clc -i <base64>` under the specified user (defaults to the installer’s current user).
- Writes `/usr/bin/ton/local.config.json` and related liteserver files so that services like TON HTTP API can start.

**Examples**
```mytonctrl
clcf
clcf -u validator
```

## print_ls_proxy_config
**Purpose:** Display the active ls-proxy configuration file.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
print_ls_proxy_config
```

**Behavior**
- Reads `/var/ls_proxy/ls-proxy-config.json` (via `get_ls_proxy_config`) and prints it in formatted JSON.
- Allows quick inspection of proxy targets after running `enable LSP`.


## create_ls_proxy_config_file
**Purpose:** Placeholder for generating an ls-proxy config file.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
create_ls_proxy_config_file
```

**Behavior**
- Outputs `TODO` because the implementation is not yet implemented.
- Use `print_ls_proxy_config` or edit `/var/ls_proxy/ls-proxy-config.json` manually until this command is implemented.


## drvcf
**Purpose:** Rebuild `config.json` for the validator engine using existing key material (dangerous recovery).

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
drvcf
```

**Behavior**
- Calls `DangerousRecoveryValidatorConfigFile`, which scans `/var/ton-work/db/keyring`, recent election dumps, and mytoncore settings to reconstruct validator, liteserver, control, DHT, and ADNL entries.
- Prints the reconstructed configuration and any unused keys so you can review the output before applying it manually.
- Intended for disaster recovery scenarios; it does not overwrite files automatically.


## setwebpass
**Purpose:** Set or change the password for the MyTonCtrl web administration (JSON-RPC) interface.

**Syntax**
```mytonctrl
setwebpass
```

**Behavior**
- Runs `/usr/src/mtc-jsonrpc/mtc-jsonrpc.py -p`, prompting for the new password and updating the credential store.
- No arguments are accepted; rerun whenever you need to rotate web admin credentials.
