ton/addresses/address-formats.mdx, before:

---
title: "Internal address formats"
---

Accordingly to [TEP 0002](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0002-address.md#smart-contract-addresses)
there exist two internal address formats on TON Blockchain:
- **raw**;
- **user-friendly**.

Every internal address can be represented in each of these formats. However, these representations are equivalent: refer to exactly one address, 
although visually differ greatly from each other.

## Raw format

The raw format is the canonical, on-chain representation of the address of a smart contract.
It is this format that is used by developers of smart contracts in the manual creation
of messages and is inspired by the [corresponding TL-B schemes](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/cac968f77dfa5a14e63db40190bda549f0eaf746/crypto/block/block.tlb#L100-L110).

### Structure

In existent workchains, the raw format consists of two components separated by a colon:

-   `workchain_id`: a signed 32-bit integer identifying the workchain.<br/>
Examples: `-1` for the MasterChain and `0` for the BaseChain.
-   `account_id`: a 256-bit identifier that is derived from a smart contract `state_init`.

Example:
`0:ca6e321c7cce9ecedf0a8ca2492ec8592494aa5fb5ce0387dff96ef6af982a3e`

Uppercase letters (A–F) may be used in address strings instead of their lowercase counterparts (a-f).

### Drawbacks

Raw addresses lack built-in safety features, making them unsuitable for general use:

-   **No error detection**: the format includes no checksum. A single-character mistake can cause irreversible loss of funds.
-   **No metadata**: for instance, each smart contract can be deployed on both Testnet and Mainnet, in which it will have the same address. 
An attempt to send real funds to the Testnet variant will result in their loss. It is desirable to have a flag in the address that prevents users from such a mistake.

## User-friendly format

The main purpose of the user-friendly format is to help prevent users from accidentally losing their funds due to a small mistake
in the raw format or unwise use of the bounce flag and from having to manually compose a message when they interact with the 
intended recipient through wallet applications (for instance, [Tonkeeper](https://tonkeeper.com/)).

In fact, the user-friendly address format is a secure, base64-encoded (or base64url-encoded) wrapper around the raw format. It adds metadata 
flags and a checksum to prevent common errors and provide greater control over message routing.

**Nota bene: this format can be applied only to addresses that are described according to the `addr_std` TL-B scheme, see addresses [general info](https://companyname-a7d5b98e.mintlify.app/ton/addresses/addresses-general-info) subpage.**

### Structure  

A user-friendly address is a 36-byte structure with the following components:  

1. Flags (1 byte): metadata that changes the handling of messages in the wallet application. `0x11` for sending bounceable messages, `0x51` for non-bounceable, add the `0x80` summand if that address should not be accepted by software running in Mainnet.
2. `workchain_id` (1 byte): an 8-bit signed integer.
3. `account_id` (32 bytes): the 256-bit ([big-endian](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/what-is-endianness-big-endian-vs-little-endian/)) account identifier.
4. Checksum (2 bytes): a [CRC16-CCITT](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton-kotlin/blob/main/crypto/src/crc16.kt) checksum of the preceding 34 bytes.

The checksum mechanism in user-friendly addresses is similar to the [Luhn algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luhn_algorithm), providing a first-line defense against input errors by validating format integrity upfront.

### Flag definitions

The first 8 bits of the user-friendly format encode the handling of messages, as defined in [TEP 0002](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0002-address.md#smart-contract-addresses):  

| Address prefix | Binary form | Bounceable | Testnet-only |
|:--------------:|:-----------:|:----------:|:------------:|  
|      `E...`    | `00010001` |    Yes     |      No      |  
|      `U...`    | `01010001` |     No     |      No      |  
|      `k...`    | `10010001` |    Yes     |     Yes      |  
|      `0...`    | `11010001` |     No     |     Yes      |

As we can see, there are 4 variants of the handling:
- send a **bounceable** message to a **Mainnet** address;
- send a **non-bounceable** message to a **Mainnet** address;
- send a **bounceable** message to a **Testnet** address;
- send a **non-bounceable** message to a **Testnet** address;

### Encoding

The 36-byte structure is encoded into a 48-character non-space string using either standard base64 (i.e., with digits, upper- and lowercase Latin letters, `/` and `+`) or URL-safe base64 (with `_` and `-` instead of `/` and `+`). Both encodings are valid and must be supported by applications.

Examples:
-   Bounceable: `EQDKbjIcfM6ezt8KjKJJLshZJJSqX7XOA4ff-W72r5gqPrHF`
-   Non-bounceable: `UQDKbjIcfM6ezt8KjKJJLshZJJSqX7XOA4ff-W72r5gqPuwA`
-   Bounceable-Testnet: `kQDKbjIcfM6ezt8KjKJJLshZJJSqX7XOA4ff-W72r5gqPgpP`
-   Non-bounceable-Testnet: `0QDKbjIcfM6ezt8KjKJJLshZJJSqX7XOA4ff-W72r5gqPleK`

**Nota bene: the same encoding is used for the so-called armored versions of [public keys](https://companyname-a7d5b98e.mintlify.app/techniques/security) and [ADNL addresses](https://companyname-a7d5b98e.mintlify.app/ton/network).**

### Wallets applications

At the moment, TON wallets work with addresses as follows:

For receiving:

- Wallets display the user's address in a user-friendly bounceable or non-bounceable form.

When sending:

0) A user sends a message with funds and, possibly, a comment to the destination's wallet address in one of the user-friendly formats through the wallet application.

1) The wallet app checks the validity of the destination address representation - its length, valid characters, prefix and checksum. If the address is not valid, then an alert is shown and the sending operation is not performed.

2) If the address has a testnet flag, and the wallet app works with the mainnet network, then an alert is shown and the sending operation is not performed.

3) The wallet app retrieve from address bounceable flag.

4) The wallet app check the destination address. If it has `unitialized` status, the app force set `bounce` field of sending message to `false` and ignore bounceable/non-bounceable flag from address representation.

5) If destination is not `unitialized` then the wallet app uses the bounceable/non-bounceable flag from the address representation for the `bounce` field of sending message.

### Custom address safety

When developing custom solutions on TON Blockchain, it is critical to implement proper address handling logic. First, always verify whether the recipient address is initialized before sending funds to prevent unintended losses.

For user-friendly format forms selection: use _bounceable_ addresses for user smart contracts with custom logic to ensure funds are returned if the contract is invalid, and _non-bounceable_ addresses for wallets to guarantee funds are credited even if the recipient is uninitialized.

### Drawbacks

- **Public key extraction**: it is impossible to extract the public key from the address, which is needed for some tasks (for example, 
to send an encrypted message to this address). Thus, until the smart contract is deployed for this address, there is no way to get the public key on-chain.
- **UI**: most OS do not allow you to select an address with double click because of `_`, `-`, `/`, `+` base64 symbols.

## Summary

- **Raw format** is for system-level use and lack safety features.
- **User-friendly format** is for application-level use, include flags and a checksum.

## Next steps
For more technical details, refer to:
- [Account statuses](/ton/statuses): how addresses evolve (active, frozen, etc.).

Commit message:

refactor: addresses workflow + some fixes in address formats page (#488)

ton/addresses/address-formats.mdx, after:

---
title: "Internal address formats"
---

Accordingly to [TEP 0002](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0002-address.md#smart-contract-addresses)
there exist two internal address formats on TON Blockchain:
- **raw**;
- **user-friendly**.

Every internal address can be represented in each of these formats. However, these representations are equivalent: refer to exactly one address, 
although visually differ greatly from each other.
For a detection how wallets and other applications use these formats, see the [adresses workflow](https://companyname-a7d5b98e.mintlify.app/ecosystem/wallet-apps/addresses-workflow) page.

## Raw format

The raw format is the canonical, on-chain representation of the address of a smart contract.
It is this format that is used by developers of smart contracts in the manual creation
of messages and is inspired by the [corresponding TL-B schemes](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/cac968f77dfa5a14e63db40190bda549f0eaf746/crypto/block/block.tlb#L100-L110).

### Structure

In existent workchains, the raw format consists of two components separated by a colon:

-   `workchain_id`: a signed 32-bit integer identifying the workchain.<br/>
Examples: `-1` for the MasterChain and `0` for the BaseChain.
-   `account_id`: a 256-bit identifier that is derived from a smart contract `state_init`.

Example:
`0:ca6e321c7cce9ecedf0a8ca2492ec8592494aa5fb5ce0387dff96ef6af982a3e`

Uppercase letters (A–F) may be used in address strings instead of their lowercase counterparts (a-f).

### Drawbacks

Raw addresses lack built-in safety features, making them unsuitable for general use:

-   **No error detection**: the format includes no checksum. A single-character mistake can cause irreversible loss of funds.
-   **No metadata**: for instance, each smart contract can be deployed on both Testnet and Mainnet, in which it will have the same address. 
An attempt to send real funds to the Testnet variant will result in their loss. It is desirable to have a flag in the address that prevents users from such a mistake.

## User-friendly format

The main purpose of the user-friendly format is to help prevent users from accidentally losing their funds due to a small mistake
in the raw format or unwise use of the bounce flag and from having to manually compose a message when they interact with the 
intended recipient through wallet applications (for instance, [Tonkeeper](https://tonkeeper.com/)).

In fact, the user-friendly address format is a secure, base64-encoded (or base64url-encoded) wrapper around the raw format. It adds metadata 
flags and a checksum to prevent common errors and provide greater control over message routing.

**Nota bene: this format can be applied only to addresses that are described according to the `addr_std` TL-B scheme, see addresses [general info](https://companyname-a7d5b98e.mintlify.app/ton/addresses/addresses-general-info) subpage.**

### Structure  

A user-friendly address is a 36-byte structure with the following components:  

1. Flags (1 byte): metadata that changes the handling of messages in the wallet application. `0x11` for sending bounceable messages, `0x51` for non-bounceable, add the `0x80` summand if that address should not be accepted by software running in Mainnet.
2. `workchain_id` (1 byte): an 8-bit signed integer.
3. `account_id` (32 bytes): the 256-bit ([big-endian](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/what-is-endianness-big-endian-vs-little-endian/)) account identifier.
4. Checksum (2 bytes): a [CRC16-CCITT](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton-kotlin/blob/main/crypto/src/crc16.kt) checksum of the preceding 34 bytes.

The checksum mechanism in user-friendly addresses is similar to the [Luhn algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luhn_algorithm), providing a first-line defense against input errors by validating format integrity upfront.

### Flag definitions

The first 8 bits of the user-friendly format encode the handling of messages, as defined in [TEP 0002](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0002-address.md#smart-contract-addresses):  

| Address prefix | Binary form | Bounceable | Testnet-only |
|:--------------:|:-----------:|:----------:|:------------:|  
|      `E...`    | `00010001` |    Yes     |      No      |  
|      `U...`    | `01010001` |     No     |      No      |  
|      `k...`    | `10010001` |    Yes     |     Yes      |  
|      `0...`    | `11010001` |     No     |     Yes      |

As we can see, there are 4 variants of the handling:
- send a **bounceable** message to a **Mainnet** address;
- send a **non-bounceable** message to a **Mainnet** address;
- send a **bounceable** message to a **Testnet** address;
- send a **non-bounceable** message to a **Testnet** address;

### Encoding

The 36-byte structure is encoded into a 48-character non-space string using either standard base64 (i.e., with digits, upper- and lowercase Latin letters, `/` and `+`) or URL-safe base64 (with `_` and `-` instead of `/` and `+`). Both encodings are valid and must be supported by applications.

Examples:
-   Bounceable: `EQDKbjIcfM6ezt8KjKJJLshZJJSqX7XOA4ff-W72r5gqPrHF`
-   Non-bounceable: `UQDKbjIcfM6ezt8KjKJJLshZJJSqX7XOA4ff-W72r5gqPuwA`
-   Bounceable-Testnet: `kQDKbjIcfM6ezt8KjKJJLshZJJSqX7XOA4ff-W72r5gqPgpP`
-   Non-bounceable-Testnet: `0QDKbjIcfM6ezt8KjKJJLshZJJSqX7XOA4ff-W72r5gqPleK`

**Nota bene: the same encoding is used for the so-called armored versions of [public keys](https://companyname-a7d5b98e.mintlify.app/techniques/security) and [ADNL addresses](https://companyname-a7d5b98e.mintlify.app/ton/network).**

### Custom address safety

When developing custom solutions on TON Blockchain, it is critical to implement proper address handling logic. First, always verify whether the recipient address is initialized before sending funds to prevent unintended losses.

For user-friendly format forms selection: use _bounceable_ addresses for user smart contracts with custom logic to ensure funds are returned if the contract is invalid, and _non-bounceable_ addresses for wallets to guarantee funds are credited even if the recipient is uninitialized.

### Drawbacks

- **Public key extraction**: it is impossible to extract the public key from the address, which is needed for some tasks (for example, 
to send an encrypted message to this address). Thus, until the smart contract is deployed for this address, there is no way to get the public key on-chain.
- **UI**: most OS do not allow you to select an address with double click because of `_`, `-`, `/`, `+` base64 symbols.

## Summary

- **Raw format** is for system-level use and lack safety features.
- **User-friendly format** is for application-level use, include flags and a checksum.

## Next steps
For more technical details, refer to:
- [Account statuses](/ton/statuses): how addresses evolve (active, frozen, etc.).
