guidebook/wallet.mdx, before:

---
title: "How to integrate a wallet with TON"
sidebarTitle: "Integrate a wallet"
---

import { Aside } from '/snippets/aside.jsx';

This guide helps you integrate your custodial or non-custodial wallet with TON or partially build a basic fresh one from scratch with the help of [TON Connect](/ecosystem/ton-connect) and auxiliary libraries.

TON Connect is a standard wallet connection protocol used on TON. It consists of many supplementary SDKs, which are split into two groups: ones that help integrate your dApp with TON ([AppKit](/ecosystem/ton-connect/appkit)), and ones that help integrate your wallet ([WalletKit](/ecosystem/ton-connect/appkit)).

Thus, this guide shows how to use TON Connect _WalletKit_ libraries to integrate the TON Blockchain into your dApp. To proceed, select your framework or environment:

<Columns cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="(Stub)"
    href="#integration"
  />
</Columns>

## Integration

Stub.

## Usage

- Integration QA guide
- Native and web wallets
- Browser extensions an in-wallet browsers

## See also

Read more about the TON Connect and WalletKit themselves:

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="TON Connect overview"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect"
  />
  <Card
    title="WalletKit overview"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit"
  />
</Columns>

Skim the reference pages with more in-depth information:

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="TON Connect manifests"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest"
  />
</Columns>

Discover app integration guides or explore complete examples:

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="Integrate a dApp"
    href="/guidebook/dapp"
  />
  <Card
    title="AppKit overview"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/appkit"
  />
  <Card
    title="CEX: Centralized EXchange"
    href="/guidebook/cex"
  />
</Columns>

Commit message:

feat/fix: remove appkit, re-organize ecosystem/ton-connect and related guidebook pages

guidebook/wallet.mdx, after:

---
title: "How to integrate a wallet with TON"
sidebarTitle: "Integrate a wallet"
---

import { Aside } from '/snippets/aside.jsx';

This guide helps you integrate your custodial or non-custodial wallet with TON or partially build a basic fresh one from scratch with the help of [TON Connect](/ecosystem/ton-connect) and [WalletKit](/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit).

TON Connect is a standard wallet connection protocol used on TON. It consists of many supplementary SDKs and supervises two major use-cases: integrations of dApps with TON and custom wallet integrations. The latter are done via the WalletKit.

To proceed with a WalletKit integration, select your framework or environment:

<Columns cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="(Stub)"
    href="#integration"
  />
</Columns>

## Integration

Stub.

## Usage

- Integration QA guide
- Native and web wallets
- Browser extensions and in-wallet browsers

## See also

Read more about the TON Connect and WalletKit themselves:

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="TON Connect overview"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect"
  />
  <Card
    title="WalletKit overview"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit"
  />
</Columns>

Skim the reference pages with more in-depth information:

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="TON Connect manifests"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest"
  />
</Columns>

Discover app integration guides or explore complete examples:

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="Integrate a dApp"
    href="/guidebook/dapp"
  />
  <Card
    title="CEX: Centralized EXchange"
    href="/guidebook/cex"
  />
</Columns>
