ecosystem/wallet-apps/addresses-workflow.mdx, before:

---
title: "Addresses workflow"
---

To understand this article, it is necessary to periodically refer to [account statuses page](/ton/statuses).

At the moment, TON wallets work with [addresses](/ton/addresses/address-formats) as follows:

For receiving:

- Wallets display the user's address in a user-friendly bounceable or non-bounceable form.

When sending:

0) A user sends a message with funds and, possibly, a comment to the destination's wallet address in one of the user-friendly formats through the wallet application.

1) The wallet app checks the validity of the destination address representation - its length, valid characters, prefix and checksum. If the address is not valid, then an alert is shown and the sending operation is not performed.

2) If the address has a testnet flag, and the wallet app works with the mainnet network, then an alert is shown and the sending operation is not performed.

3) The wallet app retrieve from address bounceable flag.

4) The wallet app check the destination address. If it has `unitialized` status, the app force set `bounce` field of sending message to `false` and ignore bounceable/non-bounceable flag from address representation.

5) If destination is not `unitialized` then the wallet app uses the bounceable/non-bounceable flag from the address representation for the `bounce` field of sending message.

Commit message:

[AI] fix: addresses-workflow.mdx

ecosystem/wallet-apps/addresses-workflow.mdx, after:

---
title: "Addresses workflow"
---

See [Account statuses](../../ton/statuses) as needed.

TON wallets work with [address formats](../../ton/addresses/address-formats) as follows:

## Receiving

- Wallets display the user's address in a user-friendly bounceable or non-bounceable form.

## Sending

1. A user sends a message with funds and optionally a comment to the destination's wallet address in one of the user-friendly formats through the wallet app.

1. The wallet app checks the validity of the destination address representation: its length, valid characters, prefix, and checksum. If the address is not valid, the wallet app shows an alert and does not send.

1. If the address has a [Testnet-only flag](../../ton/addresses/address-formats#flag-definitions) and the wallet app works on Mainnet, then the wallet app shows an alert and does not send.

1. The wallet app retrieves the bounceable flag from the address.

1. The wallet app checks the destination address. If it has `uninit` status, the app forces the `bounce` field of the sending message to `false` and ignores the bounceable/non-bounceable flag in the address representation.

1. If the destination is not `uninit`, then the wallet app uses the bounceable/non-bounceable flag from the address representation for the `bounce` field of the sending message.
