ecosystem/wallet-apps/dev.mdx, before:

---
title: "TonDevWallet"
---

TonDevWallet is a open-source desktop wallet designed for development and testing. It allows you to have custom wallet ids, versions and even highload wallet as standard TonConnect wallet. You can also emulate all transactions and see logs and results before sending them to network.

## Highlights

- Seamless integration with TON Connect
- Local transaction emulation before on-chain submission
- Manage multiple keys and wallets

## Download TonDevWallet

1. Download and install the latest release of [TonDevWallet](https://github.com/TonDevWallet/TonDevWallet/releases/tag/app-v0.7.2).
2. Launch the application and set a password to secure your wallet.

## Create or recover a wallet
1. Click **+ New Wallet** from the top menu.
2. Choose one of the available options from the screen that suits your use case:
   - **Create random wallet** - Generate a new wallet with a 24-word mnemonic phrase
   - **From Mnemonic** - Import an existing wallet using your recovery phrase
   - **From Seed** - Import a wallet using the seed
   - **From Public Key** - Import a watch-only wallet using the public key

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/wallet.png" 
  alt="Wallet creation screen"
  height="300"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

## Manage wallet and network settings

After creating your wallet, you can use the dropdown menu in the top left (Mainnet/Testnet) to switch between networks. This also updates the wallet details you see, such as the address and balance, depending on the selected network.

<Warning>
TonDevWallet is intended for development and testing on Testnet only. It is not safe to use on Mainnet, and doing so may result in irreversible fund loss.
</Warning>

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/testnet.png" 
  alt="testnet selection screen"
  height="75%"
  width="75%"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

In the wallet view, you can see the wallet address in _Bounceable, Non-Bounceable, and Raw formats_ and also your _Balance_ which updates once tokens are received.

Depending on which network (Mainnet or Testnet) you are connected to, the wallet address information displayed will change. This ensures you always interact with the correct chain environment.

## Get testnet tokens

You can get free test coins from [@testgiver_ton_bot](https://t.me/testgiver_ton_bot). Once you open the bot, paste your Testnet wallet address from TonDevWallet. The bot will send 2 TON to your address, and you can only request once per hour.

## Transfer tokens and preview transaction

The wallet becomes active only after you approve and send your first outgoing transaction, which deploys the wallet contract to the blockchain. To send a token:

1. In your wallet view, click **Transfer**.
2. Fill in the fields as shown on screen:
   - **Recipient address** – enter your own wallet address (or another valid TON wallet if you want to test sending externally).
   - **Amount** – specify how much TON to send.
   - **Message mode** – select a mode from the dropdown (e.g. 0, 64, 128) and, if needed, tick any of the extra options such as fees, bounce, errors, or destroy.
   - **Optional payload** – you can also add a message, `stateInit`, or raw cell based on your use case.
3. Click **Emulate** to preview the transaction before sending.

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/transfer.png" 
  alt="transfer screen"
  height="75%"
  width="75%"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

The local transaction emulation screen lets you preview how a transaction will behave before it’s sent to the TON blockchain. This way, you can verify the details and catch errors early without risking real execution.
You can also:
- Copy the transaction hash
- Download the transaction graph
- Open the transaction in a TON blockchain explorer

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/graph.png" 
  alt="Transaction graph screen"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

Clicking **View Details** on the graph opens a detailed TVM execution trace, showing exactly how the transaction would be processed step by step.

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/tvm.png" 
  alt="TVM execution trace screen"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

Once you are satisfied with the transaction results, click **Approve** to execute the transaction on the blockchain. You can also view this transaction with the [Testnet explorer](https://testnet.tonscan.org/).

## Connect TonDevWallet to a TonConnect dApp

To connect TonDevWallet with a TonConnect-enabled dApp, follow these steps:

1. In the dApp, open the wallet list and select **Tonkeeper** to display the connection QR code.
2. In TonDevWallet, click **TonConnect**.
3. TonDevWallet will automatically scan the QR code on your screen and establish the connection.

Once approved, your wallet is linked and ready to interact with the dApp.

Commit message:

Added tip for macos users

ecosystem/wallet-apps/dev.mdx, after:

---
title: "TonDevWallet"
---

TonDevWallet is a open-source desktop wallet designed for development and testing. It allows you to have custom wallet ids, versions and even highload wallet as standard TonConnect wallet. You can also emulate all transactions and see logs and results before sending them to network.

## Highlights

- Seamless integration with TON Connect
- Local transaction emulation before on-chain submission
- Manage multiple keys and wallets

## Download TonDevWallet

1. Download and install the latest release of [TonDevWallet](https://github.com/TonDevWallet/TonDevWallet/releases/tag/app-v0.7.2).
2. Launch the application and set a password to secure your wallet.

<Tip>
**macOS Users:** If you get a "damaged" error, open Terminal and run:
```bash
xattr -c /Applications/TonDevWallet.app
```
This removes the security flag and allows the app to open.
</Tip>


## Create or recover a wallet
1. Click **+ New Wallet** from the top menu.
2. Choose one of the available options from the screen that suits your use case:
   - **Create random wallet** - Generate a new wallet with a 24-word mnemonic phrase
   - **From Mnemonic** - Import an existing wallet using your recovery phrase
   - **From Seed** - Import a wallet using the seed
   - **From Public Key** - Import a watch-only wallet using the public key

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/wallet.png" 
  alt="Wallet creation screen"
  height="300"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

## Manage wallet and network settings

After creating your wallet, you can use the dropdown menu in the top left (Mainnet/Testnet) to switch between networks. This also updates the wallet details you see, such as the address and balance, depending on the selected network.

<Warning>
TonDevWallet is intended for development and testing on Testnet only. It is not safe to use on Mainnet, and doing so may result in irreversible fund loss.
</Warning>

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/testnet.png" 
  alt="testnet selection screen"
  height="75%"
  width="75%"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

In the wallet view, you can see the wallet address in _Bounceable, Non-Bounceable, and Raw formats_ and also your _Balance_ which updates once tokens are received.

Depending on which network (Mainnet or Testnet) you are connected to, the wallet address information displayed will change. This ensures you always interact with the correct chain environment.

## Get testnet tokens

You can get free test coins from [@testgiver_ton_bot](https://t.me/testgiver_ton_bot). Once you open the bot, paste your Testnet wallet address from TonDevWallet. The bot will send 2 TON to your address, and you can only request once per hour.

## Transfer tokens and preview transaction

The wallet becomes active only after you approve and send your first outgoing transaction, which deploys the wallet contract to the blockchain. To send a token:

1. In your wallet view, click **Transfer**.
2. Fill in the fields as shown on screen:
   - **Recipient address** – enter your own wallet address (or another valid TON wallet if you want to test sending externally).
   - **Amount** – specify how much TON to send.
   - **Message mode** – select a mode from the dropdown (e.g. 0, 64, 128) and, if needed, tick any of the extra options such as fees, bounce, errors, or destroy.
   - **Optional payload** – you can also add a message, `stateInit`, or raw cell based on your use case.
3. Click **Emulate** to preview the transaction before sending.

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/transfer.png" 
  alt="transfer screen"
  height="75%"
  width="75%"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

The local transaction emulation screen lets you preview how a transaction will behave before it’s sent to the TON blockchain. This way, you can verify the details and catch errors early without risking real execution.
You can also:
- Copy the transaction hash
- Download the transaction graph
- Open the transaction in a TON blockchain explorer

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/graph.png" 
  alt="Transaction graph screen"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

Clicking **View Details** on the graph opens a detailed TVM execution trace, showing exactly how the transaction would be processed step by step.

<img 
  src="/resources/images/tondevwallet/tvm.png" 
  alt="TVM execution trace screen"
  className="rounded-lg"
/>

Once you are satisfied with the transaction results, click **Approve** to execute the transaction on the blockchain. You can also view this transaction with the [Testnet explorer](https://testnet.tonscan.org/).

## Connect TonDevWallet to a TonConnect dApp

To connect TonDevWallet with a TonConnect-enabled dApp, follow these steps:

1. In the dApp, open the wallet list and select **Tonkeeper** to display the connection QR code.
2. In TonDevWallet, click **TonConnect**.
3. TonDevWallet will automatically scan the QR code on your screen and establish the connection.

Once approved, your wallet is linked and ready to interact with the dApp.
