languages/tolk/types/enums.mdx, before:

---
title: "Enums"
---

import { Aside } from '/snippets/aside.jsx';

Tolk supports enums, similar to TypeScript and C++ enums.

In the TVM (virtual machine) all enums are integers.
From the compiler's point of view, it's a distinct type.

```tolk
// will be 0 1 2
enum Color {
    Red
    Green
    Blue
}
```

## Enum members

Values can be specified manually. Otherwise, auto-calculated as `+1`.

```tolk
enum Mode {
    Foo = 256,
    Bar,        // implicitly 257
}
```

## Enums are distinct types, not integers

`Color.Red` is `Color`, not `int`, although it holds the value `0` at runtime.

```tolk
fun isRed(c: Color) {
    return c == Color.Red
}

fun demo() {
    isRed(Color.Blue);    // ok
    isRed(1);             // error, pass `int` to `Color`
}
```

Since enums are types, they can be:

- used as variable and parameters,
- extended with methods for an enum,
- used in struct fields, unions, generics, and other type contexts:

```tolk
struct Gradient {
    from: Color
    to: Color? = null
}

fun Color.isRed(self) {
    return self == Color.Red
}

var g: Gradient = { from: Color.Blue };
g.from.isRed();       // false
Color.Red.isRed();    // true

match (g.to) {
    null => ...
    Color => ...
}
```

## `match` for enums is exhaustive

Pattern matching on enums requires coverage of all cases:

```tolk
match (someColor) {
    Color.Red => {}
    Color.Green => {}
    // error: Color.Blue is missing
}
```

Alternatively, use `else` to handle remaining values:

```tolk
match (someColor) {
    Color.Red => {}
    else => {}
}
```

Operator `==` compares values directly:

```tolk
if (someColor == Color.Red) {}
else {}
```

## Enums are integers under the hood

At the TVM level, every enum is represented as `int`. Casting between the enum and `int` is allowed:

- `Color.Blue as int` evaluates to `2`
- `2 as Color` evaluates to `Color.Blue`

<Aside
  type="caution"
>
  Operator `as` can produce invalid values: `100 as Color`.
  Then operator `==` will return false, and exhaustive `match` will throw 5 ("out of range").
</Aside>

During deserialization with `fromCell()`, the compiler performs checks to ensure that encoded integers correspond to valid enum values.

<Aside type="tip">
  Enums in Tolk differ from Rust.
  In Rust, each enum member can have a distinct structure.
  In Tolk, union types provide that capability, so enums are only integers.
</Aside>

## Enums are allowed in `throw` and `assert`

```tolk
enum Err {
    InvalidId = 0x100
    TooHighId
}

fun validate(id: int) {
    assert (id < 1000) throw Err.TooHighId;  // excno = 257
}
```

## Stack layout and serialization

Every enum is backed by TVM `INT`. Serialized as `(u)intN` where `N` is:

- specified manually: `enum Role: int8 { ... }`
- or calculated automatically to fit all values

For details, follow [TVM representation](/languages/tolk/types/overall-tvm-stack) and [Serialization](/languages/tolk/types/overall-serialization).

Commit message:

feat(tolk): put enums page in agreement with styleguide (#1669)

languages/tolk/types/enums.mdx, after:

---
title: "Enums"
---

import { Aside } from '/snippets/aside.jsx';

Tolk supports enums, similar to TypeScript and C++ enums.

In the [TVM](/tvm/overview), all enums are represented as integers. At the compiler level, an enum is a distinct type.

```tolk
// will be 0 1 2
enum Color {
    Red
    Green
    Blue
}
```

## Enum members

Values can be specified manually. Otherwise, they are auto-calculated as `+1`.

```tolk
enum Mode {
    Foo = 256,
    Bar,        // implicitly 257
}
```

## Enum types

Enums are distinct types, not integers. `Color.Red` has type `Color`, not `int`, although it holds the value `0` at runtime.

```tolk
fun isRed(c: Color) {
    return c == Color.Red
}

fun demo() {
    isRed(Color.Blue);    // ok
    isRed(1);             // error, pass `int` to `Color`
}
```

Since enums are types, they can be:

- used as variables and parameters,
- extended with methods,
- used in struct fields, unions, generics, and other type contexts.

```tolk
struct Gradient {
    from: Color
    to: Color? = null
}

fun Color.isRed(self) {
    return self == Color.Red
}

var g: Gradient = { from: Color.Blue };
g.from.isRed();       // false
Color.Red.isRed();    // true

match (g.to) {
    null => ...
    Color => ...
}
```

## Exhaustive pattern matching

[`match`](/languages/tolk/syntax/pattern-matching) on enums requires coverage of all cases:

```tolk
match (someColor) {
    Color.Red => {}
    Color.Green => {}
    // error: Color.Blue is missing
}
```

Alternatively, use `else` to handle remaining values:

```tolk
match (someColor) {
    Color.Red => {}
    else => {}
}
```

Operator `==` compares values directly:

```tolk
if (someColor == Color.Red) {}
else {}
```

## Integer representation

At the TVM level, every enum is represented as `int`. Casting between the enum and `int` is allowed:

- `Color.Blue as int` evaluates to `2`;
- `2 as Color` evaluates to `Color.Blue`.

<Aside
  type="caution"
>
  Operator `as` can produce invalid values, for example `100 as Color`. In this case, operator `==` returns `false`, and an exhaustive `match` throws exception [5](/tvm/exit-codes#5%3A-integer-out-of-expected-range).
</Aside>

During deserialization with `fromCell()`, the compiler validates that encoded integers correspond to valid enum values.

## Usage in `throw` and `assert`

Enums are allowed in `throw` and `assert`:

```tolk
enum Err {
    InvalidId = 0x100
    TooHighId
}

fun validate(id: int) {
    assert (id < 1000) throw Err.TooHighId;  // excno = 257
}
```

## Stack layout and serialization

Every enum is [backed by TVM](/languages/tolk/types/overall-tvm-stack) `INT` and [serialized](/languages/tolk/types/overall-serialization) as `(u)intN`, where `N` is:

- specified manually, for example: `enum Role: int8 { ... }`;
- or calculated automatically to fit all values.
