language/TL-B/complex-and-non-trivial-examples.mdx, before:

---
title: "Complex and non-trivial examples"
---

## Unary

The **unary** functional type is commonly used for dynamic sizing in structures such as [hml_short](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/master/crypto/block/block.tlb#L29).

Unary supports two main options:

```tlb
unary_zero$0 = Unary ~0;
unary_succ$1 {n:#} x:(Unary ~n) = Unary ~(n + 1);
```

The `unary_zero` variation is straightforward: if the first bit is `0`, the result of the entire unary deserialization is `0`.

The `unary_succ` variation, however, is more complex: it is loaded recursively and represents a value of `~(n + 1)`. This means it repeatedly calls itself until it reaches `unary_zero`. In other words, the desired value will equal the number of units in a row.

For example, consider the serialization of the bitstring `110`.
The deserialization call chain is as follows:

```tlb
unary_succ$1 -> unary_succ$1 -> unary_zero$0
```

Once `unary_zero` is reached, the value is returned up the call stack, similar to how values are returned in a recursive function.

To better visualize the result, let's trace the return path:

```0 -> ~(0 + 1) -> ~(1 + 1) -> 2```

This shows that the bitstring `110` corresponds to `Unary 2`.

{/*## Snake

The **Snake** functional type is used to store sequences of bits with a length that is not predetermined. It is often employed in transactions with long comment in them.

```tlb
empty#_ b:bits = Snake ~0;
cons#_ {n:#} b:bits next:^(Snake ~n) = Snake ~(n + 1);
```

In this scenario, serialization continues until all links are assembled.

The `empty` variation it just deserializes a string of bits and end the process if there is no any references to other cells.

The `cons` variation deserializes a string of bits and then follows a reference to another cell, continuing the process until it reaches the `empty` variation. 
The number of such recursive calls determines the final size of `n`.

Consider the following tree of cells:
```
1[1] -> {
  2[00] -> {
    7[1001000] -> {
      25[1010000010000001100001001]
    }
  }
}
```

In this example, the first cell contains a reference. So, `1` is read and then the reference is opened according to `cons` constructor.
Next, the `00` is read and then the next reference is opened. This process continues until there are no links in the next cell. The next two bits, `00`, are part of the `b:bits` field. The remaining bits in this cell are used for the reference to the next cell.
*/}

## Hashmap

The Hashmap complex type is used to store dictionaries from FunC smart contract code, i.e., `dict`.

As a support structure we need:

```tlb
bit$_ (## 1) = Bit;
```

The following TL-B structures are used to serialize a Hashmap with a fixed key length:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l n)
          {n = (~m) + l} node:(HashmapNode m X) = Hashmap n X;

hmn_leaf#_ {X:Type} value:X = HashmapNode 0 X;
hmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:Type} left:^(Hashmap n X)
           right:^(Hashmap n X) = HashmapNode (n + 1) X;

hml_short$0 {m:#} {n:#} len:(Unary ~n) {n <= m} s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(#<= m) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
hml_same$11 {m:#} v:Bit n:(#<= m) = HmLabel ~n m;

unary_zero$0 = Unary ~0;
unary_succ$1 {n:#} x:(Unary ~n) = Unary ~(n + 1);

hme_empty$0 {n:#} {X:Type} = HashmapE n X;
hme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} root:^(Hashmap n X) = HashmapE n X;
```

This root structure is `HashmapE n X` that can be in one of the two possible states: either `hme_empty` or `hme_root`.

### Hashmap parsing example

As an example, consider the following cell, represented in binary form:

```
[1] -> {
  [00] -> {
    [1001000] -> {
      [1010000010000001100001001],
      [1010000010000000001101111]
    },
    [1011100000000000001100001001]
  }
}
```

This cell uses the `HashmapE` structure with an 8-bit key size, and its values are represented using the `uint16` type—that is, `HashmapE 8 uint16`.

The `HashmapE` structure utilizes 3 distinct key types:

```
1 = 777
17 = 111
128 = 777
```

To parse this Hashmap, we must first determine which structure type to use: either `hme_empty` or `hme_root`. This is decided by identifying the `correct prefix`. The `hme_empty` variation is indicated by a single bit `0` (`hme_empty$0`), while the `hme_root` variation is indicated by a single bit `1` (`hme_root$1`). After reading the first bit, if it is `1` (`1[1]`), we know it is the `hme_root` variation.

Next, we can populate the structure variables with known values. The initial result is:

`hme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} root:^(Hashmap 8 uint16) = HashmapE 8 uint16;`

Here, the one-bit prefix is already read. The curly braces `{}` indicate conditions that need not be read. Specifically:
- `{n:#}` indicates that `n` is any `uint32` number.
- `{X:Type}` means that `X` can be any type.

The next portion to read is `root:^(Hashmap 8 uint16)`, where the `^` symbol denotes a link that must be loaded.

```
[00] -> {
    [1001000] -> {
      [1010000010000001100001001],
      [1010000010000000001101111]
    },
    [1011100000000000001100001001]
  }
```

#### Initiating branch parsing

According to our schema, this is the correct `Hashmap 8 uint16` structure. Next, we populate it with known values, resulting in the following:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l 8)
          {8 = (~m) + l} node:(HashmapNode m uint16) = Hashmap 8 uint16;
```

As shown above, conditional variables `{l:#}` and `{m:#}` have appeared, but both values are unknown at this stage. After reading the corresponding `label`, we can deduce that `n` is part of the equation `{n = (~m) + l}`. This means we must calculate both `l` and `m`, where the sign indicates the resulting value of `~`.

To determine the value of `l`, we need to load the `label:(HmLabel ~l uint16)` sequence. Below, we outline the 3 basic structural options for `HmLabel`:


```tlb
hml_short$0 {m:#} {n:#} len:(Unary ~n) {n <= m} s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(#<= m) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
hml_same$11 {m:#} v:Bit n:(#<= m) = HmLabel ~n m;
```

Each option is determined by its corresponding prefix. Our root cell comprises 2 zero bits, displayed as (`2[00]`). Therefore, the only logical option is `hml_short$0`, which starts with a prefix of `0`.

Next, let's fill in the `hml_short` structure with known values:

```tlb
hml_short$0 {m:#} {n:#} len:(Unary ~n) {n <= 8} s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n 8
```

At this point, we don't know the value of `n`. However, since it includes a `~` character, we can calculate it. To do so, we load `len:(Unary ~n)`;  [more about unary here](#unary).

Starting with `2[00]`, only one bit remains after defining the `HmLabel` type.

We load this final bit and observe that its value is `0`, which indicates that the `unary_zero$0` variation is used. This means that the `n` value for the `HmLabel` variation is zero.

Now, we can complete the `hml_short` structure by using the calculated `n` value:

```tlb
hml_short$0 {m:#} {n:#} len:0 {n <= 8} s:(0 * Bit) = HmLabel 0 8
```
We have an empty `HmLabel`, denoted by `s = 0`, which means there is nothing to load.

Next, we complete our structure by incorporating the calculated value of `l`, as follows:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:0} {m:#} label:(HmLabel 0 8)
          {8 = (~m) + 0} node:(HashmapNode m uint16) = Hashmap 8 uint16;
```

Now that we have calculated the value of `l`, we can also calculate `m` using the equation `n = (~m) + 0`, which simplifies to `m = n - 0`. Therefore, `m = n = 8`.

With all unknown values determined, we can load the `node:(HashmapNode 8 uint16)`.

Regarding the HashmapNode, we have several options:

```tlb
hmn_leaf#_ {X:Type} value:X = HashmapNode 0 X;
hmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:Type} left:^(Hashmap n X)
           right:^(Hashmap n X) = HashmapNode (n + 1) X;
```

In this case, we determine the option not by using the prefix but by examining the parameter. Specifically, if `n = 0`, the correct result will be either `hmn_leaf` or `hmn_fork`.
Since, in this example, `n = 8`, we use the `hmn_fork` variation. Now, we can fill in the known values as follows:

```tlb
hmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:uint16} left:^(Hashmap n uint16)
           right:^(Hashmap n uint16) = HashmapNode (n + 1) uint16;
```

After entering the known values, we must calculate the `HashmapNode (n + 1) uint16`. This means that the resulting value of `n` must be equal to our parameter, i.e., 8. To calculate the local value of `n`, we use the following formula:

`n = (n_local + 1)` -> `n_local = (n - 1)` -> `n_local = (8 - 1)` -> `n_local = 7`.

```tlb
hmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:uint16} left:^(Hashmap 7 uint16)
           right:^(Hashmap 7 uint16) = HashmapNode (7 + 1) uint16;
```

Now that we know the formula obtaining the final result is straightforward.
Next, we load the left and right branches, and for each subsequent branch, [the process is repeated](#initiating-branch-parsing).

#### Analyzing loaded hashmap values

Continuing the previous example, let's examine how loading branches work for dictionary values. For instance, given the bitstring: `28[1011100000000000001100001001]`.

The result is once again `hm_edge`, and the next step is to fill in the sequence with the correct known values as follows:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l 7)
          {7 = (~m) + l} node:(HashmapNode m uint16) = Hashmap 7 uint16;
```

Next, the `HmLabel` response is loaded using the `HmLabel` variation, as the prefix is `10`.

```tlb
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(#<= m) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
```
Now, let's fill in the sequence:
```tlb
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(#<= 7) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n 7;
```

The new construction, `n:(#<= 7)`, clearly denotes a sizing value that corresponds to the number 7, which is, in fact, the `log2` of the number `+ 1`. For simplicity, however, we can count the number of bits required to represent the number 7.
In binary, the number 7 is written as `111`, which means 3 bits are needed. Therefore, the value for `n = 3`.

```tlb
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(## 3) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n 7;
```
Next, we load `n` into the sequence, which results in `111`. As noted earlier, this coincidentally equals 7. Then, we load `s` into the sequence, which consists of 7 bits: `0000000`. Remember, `s` is part of the key.

Afterwards, we return to the top of the sequence and fill in the resulting `l`:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel 7 7)
          {7 = (~m) + 7} node:(HashmapNode m uint16) = Hashmap 7 uint16;
```

Then we calculate the value of `m`: `m = 7 - 7`, which gives us `m = 0`.
Since `m = 0`, the structure is ideally suited for use with a `HashmapNode`:


```tlb
hmn_leaf#_ {X:Type} value:X = HashmapNode 0 X;
```

Next, we substitute our `uint16` type and load the value. When converted to decimal, the remaining 16 bits, `0000001100001001`, give us the value `777`.

Now, let's restore the key. We need to combine all the parts of the key that were computed previously. Each related key part is combined with one bit depending on the branch type used. A `1` bit is added for the right branch, and a `0` bit is added for the left branch. If a full `HmLabel` exists above, its bits are added to the key.

In this specific case, 7 bits are taken from the `HmLabel 0000000`, and a `1` bit is added before the sequence of zeros because the value was obtained from the right branch. The final result is 8 bits, or `10000000`, which means the key value equals `128`.


## Other hashmap types

Now that we have discussed Hashmaps and how to load the standardized Hashmap type, let's explain how the additional Hashmap types function.


### HashmapAugE

```tlb
ahm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {Y:Type} {l:#} {m:#}
  label:(HmLabel ~l n) {n = (~m) + l}
  node:(HashmapAugNode m X Y) = HashmapAug n X Y;

ahmn_leaf#_ {X:Type} {Y:Type} extra:Y value:X = HashmapAugNode 0 X Y;

ahmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {Y:Type} left:^(HashmapAug n X Y)
  right:^(HashmapAug n X Y) extra:Y = HashmapAugNode (n + 1) X Y;

ahme_empty$0 {n:#} {X:Type} {Y:Type} extra:Y
          = HashmapAugE n X Y;

ahme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} {Y:Type} root:^(HashmapAug n X Y)
  extra:Y = HashmapAugE n X Y;
```

The primary distinction between the `HashmapAugE` and the regular `Hashmap` is the presence of an `extra:Y` field in each node (not just in leaf nodes containing values).

### PfxHashmap

```tlb
phm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l n)
           {n = (~m) + l} node:(PfxHashmapNode m X)
           = PfxHashmap n X;

phmn_leaf$0 {n:#} {X:Type} value:X = PfxHashmapNode n X;
phmn_fork$1 {n:#} {X:Type} left:^(PfxHashmap n X)
            right:^(PfxHashmap n X) = PfxHashmapNode (n + 1) X;

phme_empty$0 {n:#} {X:Type} = PfxHashmapE n X;
phme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} root:^(PfxHashmap n X)
            = PfxHashmapE n X;
```
The key difference between the `PfxHashmap` and the regular `Hashmap` lies in its ability to store keys of varying lengths due to the inclusion of the `phmn_leaf$0` and `phmn_fork$1` nodes.

### VarHashmap

```tlb
vhm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l n)
           {n = (~m) + l} node:(VarHashmapNode m X)
           = VarHashmap n X;
vhmn_leaf$00 {n:#} {X:Type} value:X = VarHashmapNode n X;
vhmn_fork$01 {n:#} {X:Type} left:^(VarHashmap n X)
             right:^(VarHashmap n X) value:(Maybe X)
             = VarHashmapNode (n + 1) X;
vhmn_cont$1 {n:#} {X:Type} branch:Bit child:^(VarHashmap n X)
            value:X = VarHashmapNode (n + 1) X;

// nothing$0 {X:Type} = Maybe X;
// just$1 {X:Type} value:X = Maybe X;

vhme_empty$0 {n:#} {X:Type} = VarHashmapE n X;
vhme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} root:^(VarHashmap n X)
            = VarHashmapE n X;
```

Similarly, the main difference between the `VarHashmap` and the regular `Hashmap` is its ability to accommodate different key lengths, attributed to the presence of the `vhmn_leaf$00` and `vhmn_fork$01` nodes. Additionally, the `VarHashmap` can form a common value prefix (child map) by utilizing the `vhmn_cont$1` node.

## BinTree

```tlb
bta_leaf$0 {X:Type} {Y:Type} extra:Y leaf:X = BinTreeAug X Y;
bta_fork$1 {X:Type} {Y:Type} left:^(BinTreeAug X Y)
           right:^(BinTreeAug X Y) extra:Y = BinTreeAug X Y;
```

The binary tree key generation mechanism operates similarly to the standardized Hashmap framework but without using labels; instead, it relies on branch prefixes.

## VmTuple

```tlb
vm_tupref_nil$_ = VmTupleRef 0;
vm_tupref_single$_ entry:^VmStackValue = VmTupleRef 1;
vm_tupref_any$_ {n:#} ref:^(VmTuple (n + 2)) = VmTupleRef (n + 2);
vm_tuple_nil$_ = VmTuple 0;
vm_tuple_tcons$_ {n:#} head:(VmTupleRef n) tail:^VmStackValue = VmTuple (n + 1);
vm_stk_tuple#07 len:(## 16) data:(VmTuple len) = VmStackValue;
```

Tuple is an _actual_ tuple of elements that is written in FunC as `[a, b, c]`. VmTuple is used internally in [VmStack](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/05bea13375448a401d8e07c6132b7f709f5e3a32/crypto/block/block.tlb#L862) 
for tuple serialization, which is outputted from a contract's methods.

Let's us consider a serialization of the following tuple: [44, `Cell{00B5BD3EB0}`, -1]. 
When disassembled, it looks as follows:
```
[070003] -> {
   [] -> {
      [01000000000000002C],
      [03] -> {
         [00B5BD3EB0]
      }
   },
   [01FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF]
}
```

The root cell will be parsed using the constructor `vm_stk_tuple`, since its prefix is `0x07`. The next 2 bytes are `len:(## 16)` that equals `0003 == 3`.

Next comes `data:(VmTuple 3)`. There are two variants of parsing of `VmTuple`: `VmTuple (n + 1)` and  `VmTuple 0`. Since `n > 0`, `VmTuple (n + 1)` is used. 

The first field is `head:(VmTupleRef 2=(3-1))`. There are three variant of parsing: `0`, `1`, and `n+2`. Our `n` equals `2`, so the third variant is used.

The only field is `ref:^(VmTuple (n + 2))`, i.e. `ref:^(VmTuple 2)`.

Our `n` equals `2`, so the variant `(n + 1)` is chosen. Next read `head:(VmTupleRef n)` -> `head:(VmTupleRef 1=(2-1))`. In `VmTupleRef 1` there is only one field: `entry:^VmStackValue`.
Essentially, this field is the value,`01 000000000000002C`.

We read the `head` and reached the end, now we go in the opposite direction and read the `tail:^VmStackValue`. Going up, the first tail is `03` with a link to the cell. 
`0x03` on the stack means a cell, we just read this link and save it as the value,`00B5BD3EB0`. Then go up a level and read another `tail`, this is `01 FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF`, i.e. int equal to `-1`.

After we have reached the end, the parsing is completed, we add all the received elements into the array in the order in which we received them.

## References

[Link to the original article](https://github.com/xssnick/ton-deep-doc/blob/master/TL-B.md) - _Oleg Baranov._

Commit message:

[AI] fix: complex-and-non-trivial-examples.mdx

language/TL-B/complex-and-non-trivial-examples.mdx, after:

---
title: "Complex and non-trivial examples"
sidebarTitle: "Complex examples"
---

## Unary

The `Unary` functional type is commonly used for dynamic sizing in structures such as [hml_short](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/master/crypto/block/block.tlb#L29).

Unary supports two main options:

```tlb
unary_zero$0 = Unary ~0;
unary_succ$1 {n:#} x:(Unary ~n) = Unary ~(n + 1);
```

The `unary_zero` variation is straightforward: if the first bit is `0`, the result of the entire unary deserialization is `0`.

The `unary_succ` variation, however, is more complex: it is loaded recursively and represents a value of `~(n + 1)`. This means it repeatedly calls itself until it reaches `unary_zero`. In other words, the desired value will equal the number of units in a row.

For example, consider the serialization of the bitstring `110`.
The deserialization call chain is as follows:

```tlb
unary_succ$1 -> unary_succ$1 -> unary_zero$0
```

Once `unary_zero` is reached, the value is returned up the call stack, similar to how values are returned in a recursive function.

To better visualize the result, let's trace the return path:

```text
0 -> ~(0 + 1) -> ~(1 + 1) -> 2
```

This shows that the bitstring `110` corresponds to `Unary 2`.

{/*## Snake

The **Snake** functional type is used to store sequences of bits with a length that is not predetermined. It is often employed in transactions with long comment in them.

```tlb
empty#_ b:bits = Snake ~0;
cons#_ {n:#} b:bits next:^(Snake ~n) = Snake ~(n + 1);
```

In this scenario, serialization continues until all links are assembled.

The `empty` variation it just deserializes a string of bits and end the process if there is no any references to other cells.

The `cons` variation deserializes a string of bits and then follows a reference to another cell, continuing the process until it reaches the `empty` variation. 
The number of such recursive calls determines the final size of `n`.

Consider the following tree of cells:
```
1[1] -> {
  2[00] -> {
    7[1001000] -> {
      25[1010000010000001100001001]
    }
  }
}
```

In this example, the first cell contains a reference. So, `1` is read and then the reference is opened according to `cons` constructor.
Next, the `00` is read and then the next reference is opened. This process continues until there are no links in the next cell. The next two bits, `00`, are part of the `b:bits` field. The remaining bits in this cell are used for the reference to the next cell.
*/}

## Hashmap

The `Hashmap` complex type is used to store dictionaries from FunC smart contract code, i.e., `dict`.

We need the following support structure:

```tlb
bit$_ (## 1) = Bit;
```

The following TL-B structures are used to serialize a Hashmap with a fixed key length:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l n)
          {n = (~m) + l} node:(HashmapNode m X) = Hashmap n X;

hmn_leaf#_ {X:Type} value:X = HashmapNode 0 X;
hmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:Type} left:^(Hashmap n X)
           right:^(Hashmap n X) = HashmapNode (n + 1) X;

hml_short$0 {m:#} {n:#} len:(Unary ~n) {n <= m} s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(#<= m) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
hml_same$11 {m:#} v:Bit n:(#<= m) = HmLabel ~n m;

unary_zero$0 = Unary ~0;
unary_succ$1 {n:#} x:(Unary ~n) = Unary ~(n + 1);

hme_empty$0 {n:#} {X:Type} = HashmapE n X;
hme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} root:^(Hashmap n X) = HashmapE n X;
```

This root structure is `HashmapE n X`, which can be in one of two states: either `hme_empty` or `hme_root`.

### Hashmap parsing example

As an example, consider the following cell, represented in binary form:

```text
[1] -> {
  [00] -> {
    [1001000] -> {
      [1010000010000001100001001],
      [1010000010000000001101111]
    },
    [1011100000000000001100001001]
  }
}
```

This cell uses the `HashmapE` structure with an 8-bit key size, and its values are represented using the `uint16` type—that is, `HashmapE 8 uint16`.

The `HashmapE` structure utilizes 3 distinct key types:

```text
1 = 777
17 = 111
128 = 777
```

To parse this Hashmap, we must first determine which structure type to use: either `hme_empty` or `hme_root`. This is decided by identifying the `correct prefix`. The `hme_empty` variation is indicated by a single bit `0` (`hme_empty$0`), while the `hme_root` variation is indicated by a single bit `1` (`hme_root$1`). After reading the first bit, if it is `1` (`1[1]`), we know it is the `hme_root` variation.

Next, we can populate the structure variables with known values. The initial result is:

`hme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} root:^(Hashmap 8 uint16) = HashmapE 8 uint16;`

Here, the one-bit prefix is already read. The curly braces `{}` indicate conditions that need not be read. Specifically:
- `{n:#}` indicates that `n` is any `uint32` number.
- `{X:Type}` means that `X` can be any type.

The next portion to read is `root:^(Hashmap 8 uint16)`, where the `^` symbol denotes a link that must be loaded.

```text
[00] -> {
    [1001000] -> {
      [1010000010000001100001001],
      [1010000010000000001101111]
    },
    [1011100000000000001100001001]
  }
```

#### Initiating branch parsing

According to our schema, this is the correct `Hashmap 8 uint16` structure. Next, we populate it with known values, resulting in the following:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l 8)
          {8 = (~m) + l} node:(HashmapNode m uint16) = Hashmap 8 uint16;
```

Conditional variables `{l:#}` and `{m:#}` have appeared, but both values are unknown at this stage. After reading the corresponding `label`, we can deduce that `n` is part of the equation `{n = (~m) + l}`. This means we must calculate both `l` and `m`, where the sign indicates the resulting value of `~`.

To determine the value of `l`, we need to load the `label:(HmLabel ~l uint16)` sequence. Below, we outline the 3 basic structural options for `HmLabel`:


```tlb
hml_short$0 {m:#} {n:#} len:(Unary ~n) {n <= m} s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(#<= m) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
hml_same$11 {m:#} v:Bit n:(#<= m) = HmLabel ~n m;
```

Each option is determined by its corresponding prefix. Our root cell comprises 2 zero bits, displayed as (`2[00]`). Therefore, the only logical option is `hml_short$0`, which starts with a prefix of `0`.

Next, let's fill in the `hml_short` structure with known values:

```tlb
hml_short$0 {m:#} {n:#} len:(Unary ~n) {n <= 8} s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n 8
```

At this point, we don't know the value of `n`. However, since it includes a `~` character, we can calculate it. To do so, we load `len:(Unary ~n)`;  [more about unary here](#unary).

Starting with `2[00]`, only one bit remains after defining the `HmLabel` type.

We load this final bit and observe that its value is `0`, which indicates that the `unary_zero$0` variation is used. This means that the `n` value for the `HmLabel` variation is zero.

Now, we can complete the `hml_short` structure by using the calculated `n` value:

```tlb
hml_short$0 {m:#} {n:#} len:0 {n <= 8} s:(0 * Bit) = HmLabel 0 8
```
We have an empty `HmLabel`, denoted by `s = 0`, which means there is nothing to load.

Next, we complete our structure by incorporating the calculated value of `l`, as follows:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:0} {m:#} label:(HmLabel 0 8)
          {8 = (~m) + 0} node:(HashmapNode m uint16) = Hashmap 8 uint16;
```

Now that we have calculated the value of `l`, we can also calculate `m` using the equation `n = (~m) + 0`, which simplifies to `m = n - 0`. Therefore, `m = n = 8`.

With all unknown values determined, we can load the `node:(HashmapNode 8 uint16)`.

Regarding the HashmapNode, we have several options:

```tlb
hmn_leaf#_ {X:Type} value:X = HashmapNode 0 X;
hmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:Type} left:^(Hashmap n X)
           right:^(Hashmap n X) = HashmapNode (n + 1) X;
```

In this case, we determine the option not by using the prefix but by examining the parameter. Specifically, if `n = 0`, the correct result will be either `hmn_leaf` or `hmn_fork`.
Since, in this example, `n = 8`, we use the `hmn_fork` variation. Now, we can fill in the known values as follows:

```tlb
hmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:uint16} left:^(Hashmap n uint16)
           right:^(Hashmap n uint16) = HashmapNode (n + 1) uint16;
```

After entering the known values, we must calculate the `HashmapNode (n + 1) uint16`. This means that the resulting value of `n` must be equal to our parameter, i.e., 8. To calculate the local value of `n`, we use the following formula:

`n = (n_local + 1)` -> `n_local = (n - 1)` -> `n_local = (8 - 1)` -> `n_local = 7`.

```tlb
hmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:uint16} left:^(Hashmap 7 uint16)
           right:^(Hashmap 7 uint16) = HashmapNode (7 + 1) uint16;
```

Now that we know the formula, obtaining the final result is straightforward.
Next, we load the left and right branches, and for each subsequent branch, [the process is repeated](#initiating-branch-parsing).

#### Analyzing loaded Hashmap values

Continuing the previous example, let's examine how loading branches work for dictionary values. For instance, given the bitstring: `28[1011100000000000001100001001]`.

The result is once again `hm_edge`, and the next step is to fill in the sequence with the correct known values as follows:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l 7)
          {7 = (~m) + l} node:(HashmapNode m uint16) = Hashmap 7 uint16;
```

Next, the `HmLabel` response is loaded using the `HmLabel` variation, as the prefix is `10`.

```tlb
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(#<= m) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n m;
```
Now, let's fill in the sequence:
```tlb
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(#<= 7) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n 7;
```

The new construction, `n:(#<= 7)`, clearly denotes a sizing value that corresponds to the number 7, which is, in fact, the `log2` of the number `+ 1`. For simplicity, however, we can count the number of bits required to represent the number 7.
In binary, the number 7 is written as `111`, which means 3 bits are needed. Therefore, the value for `n` is `3`.

```tlb
hml_long$10 {m:#} n:(## 3) s:(n * Bit) = HmLabel ~n 7;
```
Next, we load `n` into the sequence, which results in `111`. As noted earlier, this coincidentally equals 7. Then, we load `s` into the sequence, which consists of 7 bits: `0000000`. Remember, `s` is part of the key.

Afterwards, we return to the top of the sequence and fill in the resulting `l`:

```tlb
hm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel 7 7)
          {7 = (~m) + 7} node:(HashmapNode m uint16) = Hashmap 7 uint16;
```

Then we calculate the value of `m`: `m = 7 - 7`, which gives us `m = 0`.
Since `m = 0`, the structure is ideally suited for use with a `HashmapNode`:


```tlb
hmn_leaf#_ {X:Type} value:X = HashmapNode 0 X;
```

Next, we substitute our `uint16` type and load the value. When converted to decimal, the remaining 16 bits, `0000001100001001`, give us the value `777`.

Now, let's restore the key. We need to combine all the parts of the key that were computed previously. Each related key part is combined with one bit depending on the branch type used. A `1` bit is added for the right branch, and a `0` bit is added for the left branch. If a full `HmLabel` exists above, its bits are added to the key.

In this specific case, 7 bits are taken from the `HmLabel 0000000`, and a `1` bit is added before the sequence of zeros because the value was obtained from the right branch. The final result is 8 bits, or `10000000`, which means the key value equals `128`.


## Other Hashmap types

The following sections explain additional Hashmap types.


### HashmapAugE

```tlb
ahm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {Y:Type} {l:#} {m:#}
  label:(HmLabel ~l n) {n = (~m) + l}
  node:(HashmapAugNode m X Y) = HashmapAug n X Y;

ahmn_leaf#_ {X:Type} {Y:Type} extra:Y value:X = HashmapAugNode 0 X Y;

ahmn_fork#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {Y:Type} left:^(HashmapAug n X Y)
  right:^(HashmapAug n X Y) extra:Y = HashmapAugNode (n + 1) X Y;

ahme_empty$0 {n:#} {X:Type} {Y:Type} extra:Y
          = HashmapAugE n X Y;

ahme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} {Y:Type} root:^(HashmapAug n X Y)
  extra:Y = HashmapAugE n X Y;
```

The primary distinction between the `HashmapAugE` and the regular `Hashmap` is the presence of an `extra:Y` field in each node (not just in leaf nodes containing values).

### PfxHashmap

```tlb
phm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l n)
           {n = (~m) + l} node:(PfxHashmapNode m X)
           = PfxHashmap n X;

phmn_leaf$0 {n:#} {X:Type} value:X = PfxHashmapNode n X;
phmn_fork$1 {n:#} {X:Type} left:^(PfxHashmap n X)
            right:^(PfxHashmap n X) = PfxHashmapNode (n + 1) X;

phme_empty$0 {n:#} {X:Type} = PfxHashmapE n X;
phme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} root:^(PfxHashmap n X)
            = PfxHashmapE n X;
```
The key difference between the `PfxHashmap` and the regular `Hashmap` lies in its ability to store keys of varying lengths due to the inclusion of the `phmn_leaf$0` and `phmn_fork$1` nodes.

### VarHashmap

```tlb
vhm_edge#_ {n:#} {X:Type} {l:#} {m:#} label:(HmLabel ~l n)
           {n = (~m) + l} node:(VarHashmapNode m X)
           = VarHashmap n X;
vhmn_leaf$00 {n:#} {X:Type} value:X = VarHashmapNode n X;
vhmn_fork$01 {n:#} {X:Type} left:^(VarHashmap n X)
             right:^(VarHashmap n X) value:(Maybe X)
             = VarHashmapNode (n + 1) X;
vhmn_cont$1 {n:#} {X:Type} branch:Bit child:^(VarHashmap n X)
            value:X = VarHashmapNode (n + 1) X;

// nothing$0 {X:Type} = Maybe X;
// just$1 {X:Type} value:X = Maybe X;

vhme_empty$0 {n:#} {X:Type} = VarHashmapE n X;
vhme_root$1 {n:#} {X:Type} root:^(VarHashmap n X)
            = VarHashmapE n X;
```

Similarly, the main difference between the `VarHashmap` and the regular `Hashmap` is its ability to accommodate different key lengths, attributed to the presence of the `vhmn_leaf$00` and `vhmn_fork$01` nodes. Additionally, the `VarHashmap` can form a common value prefix (child map) by utilizing the `vhmn_cont$1` node.

## BinTree

```tlb
bta_leaf$0 {X:Type} {Y:Type} extra:Y leaf:X = BinTreeAug X Y;
bta_fork$1 {X:Type} {Y:Type} left:^(BinTreeAug X Y)
           right:^(BinTreeAug X Y) extra:Y = BinTreeAug X Y;
```

The binary tree key generation mechanism operates similarly to the standardized Hashmap framework but without using labels; instead, it relies on branch prefixes.

## VmTuple

```tlb
vm_tupref_nil$_ = VmTupleRef 0;
vm_tupref_single$_ entry:^VmStackValue = VmTupleRef 1;
vm_tupref_any$_ {n:#} ref:^(VmTuple (n + 2)) = VmTupleRef (n + 2);
vm_tuple_nil$_ = VmTuple 0;
vm_tuple_tcons$_ {n:#} head:(VmTupleRef n) tail:^VmStackValue = VmTuple (n + 1);
vm_stk_tuple#07 len:(## 16) data:(VmTuple len) = VmStackValue;
```

Tuple is a tuple of elements that is written in FunC as `[a, b, c]`. VmTuple is used internally in [VmStack](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/ton/blob/05bea13375448a401d8e07c6132b7f709f5e3a32/crypto/block/block.tlb#L862) 
for tuple serialization, which is output from a contract's methods.

Let's consider a serialization of the following tuple: [44, `Cell{00B5BD3EB0}`, -1]. 
When disassembled, it looks as follows:
```text
[070003] -> {
   [] -> {
      [01000000000000002C],
      [03] -> {
         [00B5BD3EB0]
      }
   },
   [01FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF]
}
```

The root cell will be parsed using the constructor `vm_stk_tuple`, since its prefix is `0x07`. The next 2 bytes are `len:(## 16)`, which equals `0003 == 3`.

Next comes `data:(VmTuple 3)`. There are two variants of parsing of `VmTuple`: `VmTuple (n + 1)` and  `VmTuple 0`. Since `n > 0`, `VmTuple (n + 1)` is used. 

The first field is `head:(VmTupleRef 2=(3-1))`. There are three variants of parsing: `0`, `1`, and `n+2`. Our `n` equals `2`, so the third variant is used.

The only field is `ref:^(VmTuple (n + 2))`, i.e., `ref:^(VmTuple 2)`.

Our `n` equals `2`, so the variant `(n + 1)` is chosen. Next read `head:(VmTupleRef n)` -> `head:(VmTupleRef 1=(2-1))`. In `VmTupleRef 1` there is only one field: `entry:^VmStackValue`.
Essentially, this field is the value, `01 000000000000002C`.

We read the `head` and reached the end. Now we go in the opposite direction and read the `tail:^VmStackValue`. Going up, the first tail is `03` with a link to the cell. 
`0x03` on the stack means a cell, we just read this link and save it as the value, `00B5BD3EB0`. Then go up a level and read another `tail`. This is `01 FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF`, i.e., an int equal to `-1`.

After we reach the end, parsing is completed. We add all the received elements into the array in the order in which we received them.

## References

[Original TL‑B article by Oleg Baranov](https://github.com/xssnick/ton-deep-doc/blob/master/TL-B.md) - _Oleg Baranov._
