standard/tokens/jettons/comparison.mdx, before:

---
title: "Jetton comparison"
sidebarTitle: "Comparison"
---

This article will compare different implementations of TEP-74 standard and explore the best version for each use-case.

## In short

Jetton 2.0 is the latest and most optimized Jetton implementation. Unlike previous versions, it's deploys Jetton Wallets in the same shardchain as the owner's Toncoin wallet.

See it in action: [Jetton 2.0 repository](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/jetton-contract/tree/jetton-2.0).

## Implementation history

### Jetton 1.0

**Release date**: Apr 18, 2022

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/commit/369ae089255edbd807eb499792a0a838c2e1b272)

Since the [initial TEP-74](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md) publication in 12.03.2022, this was the first public Jetton release. It doesn't support Jetton Wallet Discovery ([TEP-89 standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0089-jetton-wallet-discovery.md)) and contains some gas estimation techniques that now are considered bad practice. Overall this implementation is deprecated and shouldn't be used for any production development.

### Discoverable Jetton

**Release date**: Jan 19, 2023

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/commit/f2253cb0f0e1ae0974d7dc0cef3a62cb6e19f806)

For a long time, this version was the most widely adopted in the community, [minter.ton.org](https://minter.ton.org/), UI mint tool, deploys Jettons with this code. It contains necessary minimum feature-wise, but isn't optimized for latest TVM and blockchain changes. Also the repository itself doesn't include any advanced tests and scripts.

### Stablecoin contract

**Release date**: Apr 14, 2024

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/stablecoin-contract/commit/7a22416d4de61336616960473af391713e100d7b)

With USDT release on TON, advanced version of Jetton contract was developed. This version introduces a lot of new TVM gas assertion techniques, as well as extended functionality. Since USDT is centralized asset, there are certain requirements and restrictions for its operations. More specifically there is no *burn* opcode, meaning that formally Governance contract is not TEP-compliant, since Jetton burn functionality is a part of the standard. Also, Minter contract includes *governance* mechanism, that allows to perform any actions on other Jetton Wallets.

Another noticeable advantage of this implementation is extensive testing. All previous versions didn't test edge-cases of config changes that will affect storage / forward fees. This test suite became the foundation for all future Jetton versions.

### Notcoin contract

**Release date**: Apr 25, 2024

[GitHub](https://github.com/OpenBuilders/notcoin-contract/commit/c9992514b71f1775cec5df49fbea31a85ddd87f9)

This version is straight forward - it is forked Stablecoin contract with removed *governance* functionality and added burn mechanism. Until recent time it was the most-suited Jetton for basic on-chain coin use-case.

### Mintless Jetton

**Release date**: Sep 22, 2024

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/mintless-jetton-contract/commit/77763e6b2df6cf96b0840c7306844751200ff046)

During the time of huge project on-chain airdrops and CEX listings, there was a demand for some cheap and easy way of initial Jetton distribution, you can read more about history [here](/standard/tokens/airdrop). This version is also made from Stablecoin contract with removed governance and allowed burn. It allows for Merkle-proof airdrops, enabling the minting of Jettons directly on the Jetton-Wallet contract in a decentralized manner. The implementation is designed to support large-scale airdrops without incurring high costs or placing significant load on the blockchain.

To this day, Mintless Jetton is the only widely known implementation that uses the `custom_payload` field in the original `transfer#0f8a7ea5` TL-B. After the initial claim, each Jetton Wallet can be used as a regular Jetton (which it actually is).

Note that to use Mintless Jetton to its full extent, you will need to cooperate with wallets for additional indexing and payload creation.

### Jetton 2.0

**Release date**: Aug 1, 2025

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/jetton-contract/commit/f2fb1fbb65d8e8ce6ec9f813f3e3dfab9268912a)

This is the latest Jetton implementation. It utilizes new shardchain optimizations — Jetton Wallet holding a user's token balance is now always deployed in the same shardchain as the owner's wallet. This became possible after the TON node introduced functionality to deploy smart contracts into a specific shardchain (`StateInit.fixed_prefix_length`).

It makes transfers and operations with Jetton 2.0 up to 3 times faster under heavy network load compared to Jettons of the previous versions. This version is recommended for all new projects working with Jettons.

Commit message:

fix: grammar and cleanup (#868)
Co-authored-by: verytactical <186486509+verytactical@users.noreply.github.com>

standard/tokens/jettons/comparison.mdx, after:

---
title: "Jetton comparison"
sidebarTitle: "Comparison"
---

This article will compare different implementations of the TEP-74 standard and explore the best version for each use case.

## In short

Jetton 2.0 is the latest and most optimized Jetton implementation. Unlike previous versions, it deploys Jetton Wallets in the same shardchain as the owner's Toncoin wallet.

See it in action: [Jetton 2.0 repository](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/jetton-contract/tree/jetton-2.0).

## Implementation history

### Jetton 1.0

**Release date**: Apr 18, 2022

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/commit/369ae089255edbd807eb499792a0a838c2e1b272)

Since the [initial TEP-74](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md) publication on 12.03.2022, this was the first public Jetton release. It doesn't support Jetton Wallet Discovery ([TEP-89 standard](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0089-jetton-wallet-discovery.md)) and contains some gas estimation techniques that are now considered bad practice. Overall, this implementation is deprecated and shouldn't be used for any production development.

### Discoverable Jetton

**Release date**: Jan 19, 2023

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/commit/f2253cb0f0e1ae0974d7dc0cef3a62cb6e19f806)

For a long time, this version was the most widely adopted in the community. The [minter.ton.org](https://minter.ton.org/) UI mint tool deploys Jettons with this code. It contains the necessary minimum feature-wise, but isn't optimized for the latest TVM and blockchain changes. Also, the repository itself doesn't include any advanced tests and scripts.

### Stablecoin contract

**Release date**: Apr 14, 2024

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/stablecoin-contract/commit/7a22416d4de61336616960473af391713e100d7b)

With the USDT release on TON, an advanced version of the Jetton contract was developed. This version introduces many new TVM gas assertion techniques, as well as extended functionality. Since USDT is a centralized asset, there are specific requirements and restrictions for its operations. More specifically, there is no *burn* opcode, which means that formally, the Governance contract is not TEP-compliant, as Jetton burn functionality is part of the standard. Also, the Minter contract includes a *governance* mechanism that allows users to perform any actions on other Jetton Wallets.

Another noticeable advantage of this implementation is extensive testing. All previous versions didn't test edge cases of config changes that will affect storage / forward fees. This test suite became the foundation for all future Jetton versions.

### Notcoin contract

**Release date**: Apr 25, 2024

[GitHub](https://github.com/OpenBuilders/notcoin-contract/commit/c9992514b71f1775cec5df49fbea31a85ddd87f9)

This version is straightforward - it is a forked Stablecoin contract with removed *governance* functionality and added burn mechanism. Until recent times, it was the most suitable Jetton for basic on-chain coin use cases.

### Mintless Jetton

**Release date**: Sep 22, 2024

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/mintless-jetton-contract/commit/77763e6b2df6cf96b0840c7306844751200ff046)

During the time of massive on-chain project airdrops and CEX listings, there was a demand for a cheap and easy way to distribute initial Jetton tokens. You can read more about the history [here](/standard/tokens/airdrop). This version is also made from the Stablecoin contract with removed governance and allowed burn. It's implemented as a Merkle-proof airdrop, enabling the minting of Jettons directly on the Jetton-Wallet contract in a decentralized manner. The implementation is designed to support large-scale airdrops without incurring high costs or placing a significant load on the blockchain.

To this day, Mintless Jetton is the only widely known implementation that uses the `custom_payload` field in the original `transfer#0f8a7ea5` TL-B. After the initial claim, each Jetton Wallet can be used as a regular Jetton (which it actually is).

Note that to use Mintless Jetton to its full extent, you will need to cooperate with wallets for additional indexing and payload creation.

### Jetton 2.0

**Release date**: Aug 1, 2025

[GitHub](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/jetton-contract/commit/f2fb1fbb65d8e8ce6ec9f813f3e3dfab9268912a)

This is the latest Jetton implementation. It utilizes new shardchain optimizations — Jetton Wallet holding a user's token balance is now always deployed in the same shardchain as the owner's wallet. This became possible after the TON node introduced functionality to deploy smart contracts into a specific shardchain (`StateInit.fixed_prefix_length`).

It makes transfers and operations with Jetton 2.0 up to 3 times faster under heavy network load compared to the previous versions of Jetton. This version is recommended for all new projects working with Jettons.
