standard/tokens/jettons/how-it-works.mdx, before:

---
title: "How it works"
---

import { Image } from '/snippets/image.jsx';
import { Aside } from '/snippets/aside.jsx';

This article describes the basic ideas and processes behind the implementation of Jettons (aka tokens in Ethereum) in the TON Blockchain.

## Related smart contracts

Standardized tokens on TON (see TEPs [0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md)
and [0089](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0089-jetton-wallet-discovery.md)) are implemented using a set of
smart contracts, including:

- [Jetton master](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/blob/main/ft/jetton-minter.fc) (that is also called _Jetton minter_) smart contract;
- [Jetton wallet](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/blob/main/ft/jetton-wallet.fc) smart contract.

It is important to keep in mind that Jetton standards provide only a general scheme of interaction, leaving the specific implementation of related contracts to developers.

### Jetton master

_Jetton master_ smart contracts store general information about a particular jetton, such as total supply (the total number of tokens of this type),
a metadata link (or the metadata itself), and the code of the standard jetton-wallet smart contract for this jetton. They
also have an _owner (admin)_ who, by sending suitable messages to them, [mints new tokens](/standard/tokens/jettons/mint), closes the minting, changes metadata, or transfers the
admin rights to another contract.

Jetton master contracts also receive notifications about the [burning of tokens](/standard/tokens/jettons/burn).
When they receive such a notification, they must adjust the total supply accordingly.

### Jetton wallet

_Jetton wallet_ smart contracts are used to [transfer](/standard/tokens/jettons/transfer), receive, and [burn](/standard/tokens/jettons/burn) jettons. Each jetton wallet contract stores
the wallet balance information for a specific user (owner), the address of the Jetton master contract (for appropriate minting), and some additional information.
In certain cases, Jetton wallets are used for individual token holders for each token type.

### Difference between Jetton wallets and regular ones

Although both regular wallets and Jetton wallets are smart contracts, there are some significant differences between them.

The regular wallets' smart contracts are designed for off-chain interaction with their owner. In most implementations, their main purpose is to receive
external messages and perform the operations requested in them. It is through a regular
wallet that the user sends requests for the transfer of tokens or their burning to the Jetton wallet smart contract.
They are designed to store only the native TON Blockchain currency: toncoins or TONs.

On the other hand, Jetton wallet smart contracts are designed only for storing and processing tokens. They ignore any external messages and
accept only special internal ones. They execute commands received only from the Jetton master, another Jetton wallet, or
their owner's regular wallet smart contracts.

## Message layouts

Interactions with Jetton contracts, which users and developers most often encounter, are:

- tokens transfer: sending tokens from one Jetton wallet to another;
- tokens minting: minting new tokens and transferring them to the Jetton wallet;
- tokens burning: burn a certain number of tokens on the Jetton wallet contract;
- wallet address providing: find the address of the Jetton wallet corresponding to a regular wallet.

<Aside
  type="caution"
>
  In all schemes below, you will see the `query id` field. Nowadays, the field is almost deprecated, and the protocol itself doesn't need it.
  It is mostly used for easier off-chain parsing and other web2 processing.
</Aside>

### Token transfer

<Image
  src="/resources/images/jettons/transfer_light.svg"
  darkSrc="/resources/images/jettons/transfer_dark.svg"
  alt="Jetton transfer"
/>

`Actor A regular wallet -> actor A Jetton wallet`. _Transfer_ message contains the following data:

| Name                   | Type              | Description                                                                                                                                                            |
| ---------------------- | ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`             | uint64            | Links the three messaging types—transfer, transfer notification, and excesses—to each other. To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**. |
| `amount`               | VarUInteger 16    | The total jetton amount to transfer.                                                                                                                                   |
| `destination`          | MsgAddress        | The address of the actor B's regular wallet.                                                                                                                           |
| `response_destination` | MsgAddress        | The wallet address used to return remaining Toncoin through the excesses message.                                                                                      |
| `custom_payload`       | Maybe ^Cell       | The optional custom data used by either the sender or receiver jetton wallet for internal logic.                                                                       |
| `forward_ton_amount`   | VarUInteger 16    | Toncoins to forward to the recipient. Must `> 0` to send a transfer notification with `forward_payload` and must be less than the Toncoin attached to this message.    |
| `forward_payload`      | Either Cell ^Cell | Optional data. If the first `32` bits equal `0x00000000`, it is a text comment.                                                                                        |

that meet the TL-B scheme specified in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
transfer#0f8a7ea5 query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16) destination:MsgAddress
                 response_destination:MsgAddress custom_payload:(Maybe ^Cell)
                 forward_ton_amount:(VarUInteger 16) forward_payload:(Either Cell ^Cell)
                 = InternalMsgBody;
```

`Actor A Jetton wallet -> actor B Jetton wallet`. _Internal transfer_ message contains the following data:

| Name                   | Type              | Description                                                                                                                                                            |
| ---------------------- | ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`             | uint64            | Links the three messaging types—transfer, transfer notification, and excesses—to each other. To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**. |
| `amount`               | VarUInteger 16    | The total jetton amount to transfer.                                                                                                                                   |
| `sender`               | MsgAddress        | The address of the actor A regular wallet.                                                                                                                             |
| `response_destination` | Maybe MsgAddress  | The optional wallet address used to return remaining Toncoin through the excesses message.                                                                             |
| `forward_ton_amount`   | VarUInteger 16    | Toncoins to forward to the recipient. Must `> 0` to send a transfer notification with `forward_payload` and must be less than the Toncoin attached to this message.    |
| `forward_payload`      | Either Cell ^Cell | Optional data. If the first `32` bits equal `0x00000000`, it is a text comment.                                                                                        |

that is not specified, but has a recommended TL-B scheme in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
internal_transfer#178d4519  query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16) from:MsgAddress
                     response_address:MsgAddress
                     forward_ton_amount:(VarUInteger 16)
                     forward_payload:(Either Cell ^Cell)
                     = InternalMsgBody;
```

`Actor B Jetton wallet → actor B regular wallet`. The transfer notification message. This is sent only if `forward_ton_amount` is not zero and contains the following data:

| Name              | Type              | Description                                                                                                                                                            |
| ----------------- | ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`        | uint64            | Links the three messaging types—transfer, transfer notification, and excesses—to each other. To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**. |
| `amount`          | VarUInteger 16    | The total jetton amount were transferred.                                                                                                                              |
| `sender`          | MsgAddress        | The address of the actor A regular wallet.                                                                                                                             |
| `forward_payload` | Either Cell ^Cell | Some data.                                                                                                                                                             |

that meet the TL-B scheme specified in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
transfer_notification#7362d09c query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16)
           sender:MsgAddress forward_payload:(Either Cell ^Cell)
           = InternalMsgBody;
```

`Actor B Jetton wallet -> actor C smart contract`. Excess message body. This is sent only if there are remaining Toncoin after paying the fees. Contains the following data:

| Name       | Type   |
| ---------- | ------ |
| `query_id` | uint64 |

that meet the TL-B scheme specified in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
excesses#d53276db query_id:uint64 = InternalMsgBody;
```

### Token minting

<Image
  src="/resources/images/jettons/mint_light.svg"
  darkSrc="/resources/images/jettons/mint_dark.svg"
  alt="Jettons minting"
/>

`Admin regular wallet -> Jetton master contract`. _Mint_ message contains the following data:

<Aside
  type="caution"
>
  The following data layout is just a possible example. The structure of the Mint message is not specified in any TEPs and is left to the choice of the developer.
</Aside>

| Name          | Type       | Description                                                                           |
| ------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`    | uint64     | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**.             |
| `receiver`    | MsgAddress | The address of the actor A regular wallet.                                            |
| `mintMessage` | Cell       | The rest of the data as in an internal transfer message, except the `query_id` field. |

The rest of the messages have already been described above when analyzing the transfer process.

### Token burning

<Image
  src="/resources/images/jettons/burn_light.svg"
  darkSrc="/resources/images/jettons/burn_dark.svg"
  alt="Jettons burning"
/>

`Actor A regular wallet -> actor A Jetton wallet`. _Burn_ message contains the following data:

| Name                   | Type           | Description                                                                       |
| ---------------------- | -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`             | uint64         | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**.         |
| `amount`               | VarUInteger 16 | The total jetton amount to burn.                                                  |
| `response_destination` | MsgAddress     | The wallet address used to return remaining Toncoin through the excesses message. |
| `custom_payload`       | Maybe ^Cell    | The optional custom data used by the receiver jetton wallet for internal logic.   |

that meet a TL-B scheme in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
burn#595f07bc query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16)
       response_destination:MsgAddress custom_payload:(Maybe ^Cell)
       = InternalMsgBody;
```

`Actor A Jetton wallet -> Jetton master contract`. _Burn notification_ message contains the following data:

| Name                   | Type           | Description                                                                       |
| ---------------------- | -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`             | uint64         | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**.         |
| `amount`               | VarUInteger 16 | The total jetton amount was burned.                                               |
| `sender`               | MsgAddress     | The address of the actor A regular wallet.                                        |
| `response_destination` | MsgAddress     | The wallet address used to return remaining Toncoin through the excesses message. |

that is not specified but has a recommended TL-B scheme in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
burn_notification#7bdd97de query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16)
       sender:MsgAddress response_destination:MsgAddress
       = InternalMsgBody;
```

### Wallet address providing

This process is straightforward. Some actor sends to the Jetton master contract `provide_wallet_address` message that contains the following fields:

| Name              | Type       | Description                                                                |
| ----------------- | ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`        | uint64     | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**.  |
| `owner_address`   | MsgAddress | The address of the actor for which the Jetton wallet address is needed.    |
| `include_address` | Bool       | Whether to include the address of the actor himself in the output message. |

Then, the Jetton master contract sends to the actor a message that contains the following fields:

| Name             | Type              | Description                                                               |
| ---------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`       | uint64            | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**. |
| `wallet_address` | MsgAddress        | The Jetton wallet contract address.                                       |
| `owner_address`  | Maybe ^MsgAddress | The address of the owner.                                                 |

These messages meet the corresponding TL-B schemes in [TEP 0089](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0089-jetton-wallet-discovery.md):

```tlb
provide_wallet_address#2c76b973 query_id:uint64 owner_address:MsgAddress
include_address:Bool = InternalMsgBody;

take_wallet_address#d1735400 query_id:uint64 wallet_address:MsgAddress
owner_address:(Maybe ^MsgAddress) = InternalMsgBody;
```

## Interaction from UI

There are three actions that can be performed through the UI:

- [getting wallet balance](/standard/tokens/jettons/wallet-data);
- [transfer jettons](/standard/tokens/jettons/transfer);
- indexing available jettons.

### Applications

The most popular user wallet applications, such as [TonKeeper](https://tonkeeper.com/), use their own SQL-like database. When the user receives a new jetton for the first time,
the application processes the `transfer_notification` message. Next, information about the number of jettons received is taken from it, and it is
checked if there is information about this jetton in the applications database. If there is, information is added to the database stating that the user has a
new type of jetton in the amount received. If not, the database starts indexing this new jetton, and after the validation process begins to show data
about it to users. This is how all the jettons that a given user has and their amounts are listed.

For a user to transfer a given amount of a token to another user, they only need to fill in the `destination` and `amount`
fields through the application. Next, it will automatically generate a transfer message and send it to the Jetton wallet associated with the user.

### Web services

Various web services, such as [Tonviewer](https://tonviewer.com/), can also be used to obtain information about the types of user jettons and their amounts.
Unlike wallet applications, they also have the ability to directly invoke the get methods of related smart contracts.
However, they are not designed to generate and send messages.

Commit message:

upd(jettons/tokens): add decimals

standard/tokens/jettons/how-it-works.mdx, after:

---
title: "How it works"
---

import { Image } from '/snippets/image.jsx';
import { Aside } from '/snippets/aside.jsx';

This article describes the basic ideas and processes behind the implementation of Jettons (aka tokens in Ethereum) in the TON Blockchain.

## Related smart contracts

Standardized tokens on TON (see TEPs [0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md)
and [0089](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0089-jetton-wallet-discovery.md)) are implemented using a set of
smart contracts, including:

- [Jetton master](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/blob/main/ft/jetton-minter.fc) (that is also called _Jetton minter_) smart contract;
- [Jetton wallet](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/token-contract/blob/main/ft/jetton-wallet.fc) smart contract.

It is important to keep in mind that Jetton standards provide only a general scheme of interaction, leaving the specific implementation of related contracts to developers.

### Jetton master

_Jetton master_ smart contracts store general information about a particular jetton, such as total supply (the total number of tokens of this type),
a metadata link (or the metadata itself), and the code of the standard jetton-wallet smart contract for this jetton. They
also have an _owner (admin)_ who, by sending suitable messages to them, [mints new tokens](/standard/tokens/jettons/mint), closes the minting, changes metadata, or transfers the
admin rights to another contract.

Jetton master contracts also receive notifications about the [burning of tokens](/standard/tokens/jettons/burn).
When they receive such a notification, they must adjust the total supply accordingly.

### Jetton wallet

_Jetton wallet_ smart contracts are used to [transfer](/standard/tokens/jettons/transfer), receive, and [burn](/standard/tokens/jettons/burn) jettons. Each jetton wallet contract stores
the wallet balance information for a specific user (owner), the address of the Jetton master contract (for appropriate minting), and some additional information.
In certain cases, Jetton wallets are used for individual token holders for each token type.

### Difference between Jetton wallets and regular ones

Although both regular wallets and Jetton wallets are smart contracts, there are some significant differences between them.

The regular wallets' smart contracts are designed for off-chain interaction with their owner. In most implementations, their main purpose is to receive
external messages and perform the operations requested in them. It is through a regular
wallet that the user sends requests for the transfer of tokens or their burning to the Jetton wallet smart contract.
They are designed to store only the native TON Blockchain currency: toncoins or TONs.

On the other hand, Jetton wallet smart contracts are designed only for storing and processing tokens. They ignore any external messages and
accept only special internal ones. They execute commands received only from the Jetton master, another Jetton wallet, or
their owner's regular wallet smart contracts.

## Decimals parameter

<Aside type="danger" title="Funds at risk">
  Each jetton stores a `decimals` parameter in its metadata that determines how amounts are displayed. Transferring without accounting for `decimals` can result in sending 1000 times the intended amount—irreversible on mainnet.

  Mitigation: Always retrieve and apply the correct `decimals` value before calculating transfer amounts. Test transfers with small amounts on testnet first.
</Aside>

The `decimals` parameter is stored in the jetton [metadata](/standard/tokens/metadata#jetton-metadata-attributes) and defines the number of decimal places for displaying token amounts. The on-chain balance is stored as an integer in the smallest unit (nano-tokens), and must be divided by 10^decimals to get the user-facing value.

Common values:

- Most jettons use `decimals: 9` (default when not specified)
- USDT uses `decimals: 6`

Example: If the on-chain balance is 1000000000 nano-tokens:

- With `decimals: 9` → displayed as 1.0 token
- With `decimals: 6` → displayed as 1000.0 tokens

When transferring jettons programmatically, the amount must be calculated as: `on_chain_amount = display_amount × 10^decimals`.

For example, to transfer 1 USDT (`decimals: 6`):
- Correct on-chain amount: `1 × 10^6 = 1000000`
- Incorrect (using default 9): `1 × 10^9 = 1000000000` (transfers 1000 USDT instead of 1)

To retrieve the `decimals` value, use the [Metadata API endpoint](/ecosystem/api/toncenter/v3/accounts/get-account-metadata) or parse the metadata from the jetton master contract. Most SDKs handle `decimals` automatically when displaying balances.

## Message layouts

Interactions with Jetton contracts, which users and developers most often encounter, are:

- tokens transfer: sending tokens from one Jetton wallet to another;
- tokens minting: minting new tokens and transferring them to the Jetton wallet;
- tokens burning: burn a certain number of tokens on the Jetton wallet contract;
- wallet address providing: find the address of the Jetton wallet corresponding to a regular wallet.

<Aside
  type="caution"
>
  In all schemes below, you will see the `query id` field. Nowadays, the field is almost deprecated, and the protocol itself doesn't need it.
  It is mostly used for easier off-chain parsing and other web2 processing.
</Aside>

### Token transfer

<Image
  src="/resources/images/jettons/transfer_light.svg"
  darkSrc="/resources/images/jettons/transfer_dark.svg"
  alt="Jetton transfer"
/>

`Actor A regular wallet -> actor A Jetton wallet`. _Transfer_ message contains the following data:

| Name                   | Type              | Description                                                                                                                                                            |
| ---------------------- | ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`             | uint64            | Links the three messaging types—transfer, transfer notification, and excesses—to each other. To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**. |
| `amount`               | VarUInteger 16    | The total jetton amount to transfer.                                                                                                                                   |
| `destination`          | MsgAddress        | The address of the actor B's regular wallet.                                                                                                                           |
| `response_destination` | MsgAddress        | The wallet address used to return remaining Toncoin through the excesses message.                                                                                      |
| `custom_payload`       | Maybe ^Cell       | The optional custom data used by either the sender or receiver jetton wallet for internal logic.                                                                       |
| `forward_ton_amount`   | VarUInteger 16    | Toncoins to forward to the recipient. Must `> 0` to send a transfer notification with `forward_payload` and must be less than the Toncoin attached to this message.    |
| `forward_payload`      | Either Cell ^Cell | Optional data. If the first `32` bits equal `0x00000000`, it is a text comment.                                                                                        |

that meet the TL-B scheme specified in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
transfer#0f8a7ea5 query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16) destination:MsgAddress
                 response_destination:MsgAddress custom_payload:(Maybe ^Cell)
                 forward_ton_amount:(VarUInteger 16) forward_payload:(Either Cell ^Cell)
                 = InternalMsgBody;
```

`Actor A Jetton wallet -> actor B Jetton wallet`. _Internal transfer_ message contains the following data:

| Name                   | Type              | Description                                                                                                                                                            |
| ---------------------- | ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`             | uint64            | Links the three messaging types—transfer, transfer notification, and excesses—to each other. To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**. |
| `amount`               | VarUInteger 16    | The total jetton amount to transfer.                                                                                                                                   |
| `sender`               | MsgAddress        | The address of the actor A regular wallet.                                                                                                                             |
| `response_destination` | Maybe MsgAddress  | The optional wallet address used to return remaining Toncoin through the excesses message.                                                                             |
| `forward_ton_amount`   | VarUInteger 16    | Toncoins to forward to the recipient. Must `> 0` to send a transfer notification with `forward_payload` and must be less than the Toncoin attached to this message.    |
| `forward_payload`      | Either Cell ^Cell | Optional data. If the first `32` bits equal `0x00000000`, it is a text comment.                                                                                        |

that is not specified, but has a recommended TL-B scheme in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
internal_transfer#178d4519  query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16) from:MsgAddress
                     response_address:MsgAddress
                     forward_ton_amount:(VarUInteger 16)
                     forward_payload:(Either Cell ^Cell)
                     = InternalMsgBody;
```

`Actor B Jetton wallet → actor B regular wallet`. The transfer notification message. This is sent only if `forward_ton_amount` is not zero and contains the following data:

| Name              | Type              | Description                                                                                                                                                            |
| ----------------- | ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`        | uint64            | Links the three messaging types—transfer, transfer notification, and excesses—to each other. To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**. |
| `amount`          | VarUInteger 16    | The total jetton amount were transferred.                                                                                                                              |
| `sender`          | MsgAddress        | The address of the actor A regular wallet.                                                                                                                             |
| `forward_payload` | Either Cell ^Cell | Some data.                                                                                                                                                             |

that meet the TL-B scheme specified in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
transfer_notification#7362d09c query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16)
           sender:MsgAddress forward_payload:(Either Cell ^Cell)
           = InternalMsgBody;
```

`Actor B Jetton wallet -> actor C smart contract`. Excess message body. This is sent only if there are remaining Toncoin after paying the fees. Contains the following data:

| Name       | Type   |
| ---------- | ------ |
| `query_id` | uint64 |

that meet the TL-B scheme specified in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
excesses#d53276db query_id:uint64 = InternalMsgBody;
```

### Token minting

<Image
  src="/resources/images/jettons/mint_light.svg"
  darkSrc="/resources/images/jettons/mint_dark.svg"
  alt="Jettons minting"
/>

`Admin regular wallet -> Jetton master contract`. _Mint_ message contains the following data:

<Aside
  type="caution"
>
  The following data layout is just a possible example. The structure of the Mint message is not specified in any TEPs and is left to the choice of the developer.
</Aside>

| Name          | Type       | Description                                                                           |
| ------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`    | uint64     | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**.             |
| `receiver`    | MsgAddress | The address of the actor A regular wallet.                                            |
| `mintMessage` | Cell       | The rest of the data as in an internal transfer message, except the `query_id` field. |

The rest of the messages have already been described above when analyzing the transfer process.

### Token burning

<Image
  src="/resources/images/jettons/burn_light.svg"
  darkSrc="/resources/images/jettons/burn_dark.svg"
  alt="Jettons burning"
/>

`Actor A regular wallet -> actor A Jetton wallet`. _Burn_ message contains the following data:

| Name                   | Type           | Description                                                                       |
| ---------------------- | -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`             | uint64         | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**.         |
| `amount`               | VarUInteger 16 | The total jetton amount to burn.                                                  |
| `response_destination` | MsgAddress     | The wallet address used to return remaining Toncoin through the excesses message. |
| `custom_payload`       | Maybe ^Cell    | The optional custom data used by the receiver jetton wallet for internal logic.   |

that meet a TL-B scheme in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
burn#595f07bc query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16)
       response_destination:MsgAddress custom_payload:(Maybe ^Cell)
       = InternalMsgBody;
```

`Actor A Jetton wallet -> Jetton master contract`. _Burn notification_ message contains the following data:

| Name                   | Type           | Description                                                                       |
| ---------------------- | -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`             | uint64         | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**.         |
| `amount`               | VarUInteger 16 | The total jetton amount was burned.                                               |
| `sender`               | MsgAddress     | The address of the actor A regular wallet.                                        |
| `response_destination` | MsgAddress     | The wallet address used to return remaining Toncoin through the excesses message. |

that is not specified but has a recommended TL-B scheme in [TEP 0074](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0074-jettons-standard.md):

```tlb
burn_notification#7bdd97de query_id:uint64 amount:(VarUInteger 16)
       sender:MsgAddress response_destination:MsgAddress
       = InternalMsgBody;
```

### Wallet address providing

This process is straightforward. Some actor sends to the Jetton master contract `provide_wallet_address` message that contains the following fields:

| Name              | Type       | Description                                                                |
| ----------------- | ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`        | uint64     | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**.  |
| `owner_address`   | MsgAddress | The address of the actor for which the Jetton wallet address is needed.    |
| `include_address` | Bool       | Whether to include the address of the actor himself in the output message. |

Then, the Jetton master contract sends to the actor a message that contains the following fields:

| Name             | Type              | Description                                                               |
| ---------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `query_id`       | uint64            | To ensure this process works correctly, **always use a unique query ID**. |
| `wallet_address` | MsgAddress        | The Jetton wallet contract address.                                       |
| `owner_address`  | Maybe ^MsgAddress | The address of the owner.                                                 |

These messages meet the corresponding TL-B schemes in [TEP 0089](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/master/text/0089-jetton-wallet-discovery.md):

```tlb
provide_wallet_address#2c76b973 query_id:uint64 owner_address:MsgAddress
include_address:Bool = InternalMsgBody;

take_wallet_address#d1735400 query_id:uint64 wallet_address:MsgAddress
owner_address:(Maybe ^MsgAddress) = InternalMsgBody;
```

## Interaction from UI

There are three actions that can be performed through the UI:

- [getting wallet balance](/standard/tokens/jettons/wallet-data);
- [transfer jettons](/standard/tokens/jettons/transfer);
- indexing available jettons.

### Applications

The most popular user wallet applications, such as [TonKeeper](https://tonkeeper.com/), use their own SQL-like database. When the user receives a new jetton for the first time,
the application processes the `transfer_notification` message. Next, information about the number of jettons received is taken from it, and it is
checked if there is information about this jetton in the applications database. If there is, information is added to the database stating that the user has a
new type of jetton in the amount received. If not, the database starts indexing this new jetton, and after the validation process begins to show data
about it to users. This is how all the jettons that a given user has and their amounts are listed.

For a user to transfer a given amount of a token to another user, they only need to fill in the `destination` and `amount`
fields through the application. Next, it will automatically generate a transfer message and send it to the Jetton wallet associated with the user.

### Web services

Various web services, such as [Tonviewer](https://tonviewer.com/), can also be used to obtain information about the types of user jettons and their amounts.
Unlike wallet applications, they also have the ability to directly invoke the get methods of related smart contracts.
However, they are not designed to generate and send messages.
