ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/index.mdx, before:

---
title: "WalletKit: TON Connect for custodial and non-custodial wallets"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

**TON Connect WalletKit** is an open-source SDK that helps integrate your custodial or non-custodial wallet with TON in a secure and streamlined fashion.

It's designed for institutions, non-custodians, and custodians that need full control over key management, signing, and access without compromising UX or compliance.

## Features

<Note>Awaits a partial or full release of the WalletKit</Note>

## Use cases

<Note>Awaits a partial or full release of the WalletKit</Note>

## Quick start

First, follow this step-by-step guide:

<Card
  title="How to integrate a wallet with TON"
  href="/guides/wallet"
/>

Then, follow relevant usage recipes:

<Tabs>
  <Tab
    title="Web"
    icon="globe"
  >
    <Columns
      cols={3}
    >
      <Card
        title="Initialize the kit"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/init"
      />
    </Columns>
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## See also

Read more about the TON Connect itself:

<Card
  title="TON Connect overview"
  href="/ecosystem/ton-connect"
/>

Skim the reference pages with more in-depth information:

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="TON Connect manifests"
    href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest"
  />

  <Card
    title="@tonconnect/protocol"
    arrow="true"
    href="https://ton-connect.github.io/sdk/modules/_tonconnect_protocol.html"
  />
</Columns>

Commit message:

feat(ton-connect): TON wallet management

ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/index.mdx, after:

---
title: "WalletKit: TON Connect for custodial and non-custodial wallets"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

**TON Connect WalletKit** is an open-source SDK that helps integrate your custodial or non-custodial wallet with TON in a secure and streamlined fashion.

It's designed for institutions, non-custodians, and custodians that need full control over key management, signing, and access without compromising UX or compliance.

## Features

<Note>Awaits a partial or full release of the WalletKit</Note>

## Use cases

<Note>Awaits a partial or full release of the WalletKit</Note>

## Quick start

First, follow this step-by-step guide: [How to integrate a wallet with TON](/guides/wallet).

Then, follow relevant usage recipes:

<Tabs>
  <Tab
    title="Web"
    icon="globe"
  >
    <Columns
      cols={3}
    >
      <Card
        title="Initialize the kit"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/init"
      />
      <Card
        title="Manage TON wallets"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/wallets"
      />
      <Card
        title="Handle connections"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/connections"
      />
    </Columns>
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## See also

Read more about the TON Connect itself: [TON Connect overview](/ecosystem/ton-connect).

Skim the reference pages with more in-depth information:

- [TON Connect manifests](/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest)
- [`@tonconnect/protocol`, external API reference](https://ton-connect.github.io/sdk/modules/_tonconnect_protocol.html)
