ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/overview.mdx, before:

---
title: "WalletKit: TON Connect for custodial and non-custodial wallets"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

import { Aside } from '/snippets/aside.jsx';

**TON Connect WalletKit** is an open-source SDK that helps integrate your custodial or non-custodial wallet with TON in a secure and streamlined fashion.

It's designed for institutions, non-custodians, and custodians that need full control over key management, signing, and access without compromising UX or compliance.

## Features

<Aside>Awaits a partial or full release of the WalletKit</Aside>

## Use cases

<Aside>Awaits a partial or full release of the WalletKit</Aside>

## Quick start

First, follow this step-by-step guide: [How to integrate a wallet with TON](/ecosystem/ton-connect/wallet).

Then, follow relevant usage recipes:

<Tabs>
  <Tab
    title="Web"
    icon="globe"
  >
    <Columns
      cols={3}
    >
      <Card
        title="Initialize the kit"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/init"
      />

      <Card
        title="Manage TON wallets"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/wallets"
      />

      <Card
        title="Handle connections"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/connections"
      />

      <Card
        title="Handle other events"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/events"
      />
    </Columns>
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## See also

Read more about the TON Connect itself: [TON Connect overview](/ecosystem/ton-connect/overview).

Skim the reference pages with more in-depth information:

- [TON Connect manifests](/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest)
- [`@tonconnect/protocol`, external API reference](https://ton-connect.github.io/sdk/modules/_tonconnect_protocol.html)

Commit message:

feat(walletkit): how to work with Toncoin (#1526)

ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/overview.mdx, after:

---
title: "WalletKit: TON Connect for custodial and non-custodial wallets"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

import { Aside } from '/snippets/aside.jsx';

**TON Connect WalletKit** is an open-source SDK that helps integrate your custodial or non-custodial wallet with TON in a secure and streamlined fashion.

It's designed for institutions, non-custodians, and custodians that need full control over key management, signing, and access without compromising UX or compliance.

## Features

- TON Connect protocol: Handles connect, disconnect, transaction and data sign requests
- Wallet management: Support for multiple TON wallets at once, with persistent storage and optional use of custom signers
- Action previews: Transaction emulation with money flow analysis
- Asset support: Toncoin (TON), Jettons (including USDTs), NFTs with metadata
- Platform availability: Use on the Web, on mobile (Android and iOS), and in browser extensions

## Use cases

WalletKit supports both small wallet services and large cross-chain systems.

## Quick start

First, follow this step-by-step guide: [How to integrate a wallet with TON](/ecosystem/ton-connect/wallet).

Then, follow relevant usage recipes:

<Tabs>
  <Tab
    title="Web"
    icon="globe"
  >
    <Columns
      cols={3}
    >
      <Card
        title="Initialize the kit"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/init"
      />

      <Card
        title="Manage TON wallets"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/wallets"
      />

      <Card
        title="Handle connections"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/connections"
      />

      <Card
        title="Handle other events"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/events"
      />

      <Card
        title="Work with Toncoin"
        href="/ecosystem/ton-connect/walletkit/web/toncoin"
      />
    </Columns>
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## See also

Read more about the TON Connect itself: [TON Connect overview](/ecosystem/ton-connect/overview).

Skim the reference pages with more in-depth information:

- [TON Connect manifests](/ecosystem/ton-connect/manifest)
- [`@tonconnect/protocol`, external API reference](https://ton-connect.github.io/sdk/modules/_tonconnect_protocol.html)
