standard/tokens/nft/overview.mdx, before:

---
title: "NFT: Non-fungible token"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

Non-Fungible Tokens (TEP-62) represent the digital embodiment of uniqueness within the TON ecosystem. Unlike their fungible counterparts, each NFT possesses distinct characteristics that make it irreplaceable and non-interchangeable. This fundamental property of uniqueness enables NFTs to serve as digital certificates of authenticity for a vast array of digital and physical assets.

The power of NFTs lies in their ability to prove verifiable ownership of digital assets through blockchain technology. Each token carries a unique identifier and associated metadata that distinguishes it from every other token in existence. This uniqueness makes NFTs particularly valuable for representing assets where individual characteristics matter significantly.

Use cases:

- Digital art
- Real world assets
- Access rights

The technical implementation of NFTs in TON mirrors the distributed architecture philosophy found in Jettons. Individual item contracts represent each NFT, while collection contracts manage overall collection metadata and coordinate minting processes. This distributed approach ensures that NFT operations remain efficient and scalable even as collections grow to encompass thousands or millions of individual tokens.

Read more:

- [NFTs explained](/standard/tokens/nft/how-it-works)
- [TEP-62](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/0d7989fba6f2d9cb08811bf47263a9b314dc5296/text/0062-nft-standard.md)

Commit message:

add overview mention about transfer

standard/tokens/nft/overview.mdx, after:

---
title: "NFT: Non-fungible token"
sidebarTitle: "Overview"
---

Non-Fungible Tokens (TEP-62) represent the digital embodiment of uniqueness within the TON ecosystem. Unlike their fungible counterparts, each NFT possesses distinct characteristics that make it irreplaceable and non-interchangeable. This fundamental property of uniqueness enables NFTs to serve as digital certificates of authenticity for a vast array of digital and physical assets.

The power of NFTs lies in their ability to prove verifiable ownership of digital assets through blockchain technology. Each token carries a unique identifier and associated metadata that distinguishes it from every other token in existence. This uniqueness makes NFTs particularly valuable for representing assets where individual characteristics matter significantly.

Use cases:

- Digital art
- Real world assets
- Access rights

The technical implementation of NFTs in TON mirrors the distributed architecture philosophy found in Jettons. Individual item contracts represent each NFT, while collection contracts manage overall collection metadata and coordinate minting processes. This distributed approach ensures that NFT operations remain efficient and scalable even as collections grow to encompass thousands or millions of individual tokens.

## Architecture and smart contracts

NFTs in TON are built using a distributed smart contract architecture consisting of:

- **NFT collection contracts** - serve as the source of truth for items, providing addresses, collection metadata, and coordinating the overall collection
- **NFT item contracts** - each NFT is represented by its own smart contract account, storing collection address, index, current owner, and individual metadata

This architecture ensures that each NFT operates independently while maintaining connection to its collection, enabling efficient and scalable operations.

## Transfer mechanism

The NFT transfer process in TON is designed to be secure and flexible. When transferring an NFT, the current owner sends a transfer message to the NFT item contract, which updates ownership and optionally sends notifications and excess Toncoin to specified addresses. The transfer mechanism includes detailed message formatting, ownership notifications, and proper handling of excess funds.

Read more:

- [NFTs explained](/standard/tokens/nft/how-it-works)
- [TEP-62](https://github.com/ton-blockchain/TEPs/blob/0d7989fba6f2d9cb08811bf47263a9b314dc5296/text/0062-nft-standard.md)
